>> Hello, everyone. Welcome back.
In this video, we'll continue along
the line of non-linear econometric models,
and introduce another type
of limited dependent variable models,
the so-called count data models,
where the dependent variable takes count values,
that is non-negative integers.
We'll start with Poisson regression models
and discuss one major limitation of Poisson models.
That is, it cannot properly
handle the so-called overdispersion issue.
We'll then introduce an extension
of Poisson regression model,
the negative binomial model,
which can help account for overdispersion in the data
and subsumes the basic Poisson model as an extreme case.
Let's get started. In this video,
we'll focus on the Poisson regression model first.
We'll first introduce the Poisson distribution,
a commonly used discrete probability distribution,
based on which the Poisson regression model is developed.
We'll then explain the setup of
the Poisson regression model in
detail and how to estimate it.
We'll then discuss how to interpret
Poisson model coefficients by discussing
both the direct interpretation of
the Beta coefficients and
the usual partial or marginal effects.
Finally, we'll introduce the issue of overdispersion,
which is a major limitation of
Poisson regression models. Let's dig in.
As mentioned, the type of model
we're going to introduce is part
of the series of
limited dependent variable models
we have been discussing.
This time, we'll focus on the case where
the dependent variable takes only count values.
That is non-negative integers starting from 0,
1, 2, and so on.
Apparently, such a case is very common in
real world settings and examples can be easily found.
For example, the number of
customer visits during a certain period of time.
Due to the nature of count values,
the y variable can only take
integer values and cannot be negative.
So it differs from the standard linear regression setting
and hence calls for
a different approach to properly handle it.
Notice that if the count values
are spread over a wide range
and involve a lot of
large integer values like hundreds or thousands,
then we can simply treat the integer values
as continuous values as an approximation,
which should be close enough given
the wide range and the large scale of the values.
In this case, if zero appears a lot in the data,
which means the non-negative constraint binds often,
then we can apply the tobit model as we have introduced.
If zero doesn't appear that often,
then we can even ignore the data sensoring
issue and simply apply a regular linear regression.
A specially designed count data model
is needed and the most
meaningful only when the dependent variable
mostly takes relatively small count values.
For example, mostly 0,
1, 2, and 3.
In this case, approximating these small integer values
with continuous real values
would be a poor approximation,
and the regular linear regression models or
tobit models would hence be inadequate.
In this case, we will need to apply
some specially designed count data model as we'll
introduce next to properly handle this type of problem.
To introduce the Poisson regression model,
we need to first introduce
the Poisson distribution which is
a very commonly used probability distribution
for discrete values.
So this is a probability distribution
just like a normal distribution.
But the full co-random variable
here only takes discrete values.
If a random variable say
y follows the Poisson distribution,
then the probability of y being equal to
a particular non-negative integer k is equal
to this value as determined by this expression.
This expression may look daunting at the first glance,
but we can easily understand it
once we dismantle it into parts.
First, Lambda is a parameter of the Poisson distribution.
So Lambda is a given
constant and it needs to be positive.
So Lambda is always greater than zero.
It can take any positive real value.
Lambda is the only parameter of
a Poisson distribution and plays
a key role in determining
the distribution shape as we'll discuss soon.
E represents the usual exponential function
whose base is the so-called Euler number,
the magical constant that is approximately 2.718.
And the k!
is the factorial of k,
which equals the product of
all positive integers less than or equal to k. That is,
the factorial of k is equal to k times
k-1 times k-2 times all the way to one.
Notice that if k = 0,
the factorial of zero is defined as one.
As we can see, given the parameter
Lambda's value and the integere k's value,
this expression's value is
fully determined and it represents
the probability of the focal random variable being
equal to k. Now,
let's look at some concrete numbers as examples.
If the focal random variable y follows
a Poisson distribution with Lambda as the parameter,
then, for example,
the probability of y = 0 is equal to
(Lambda)^0 times e^(-Lambda) divided
by the factorial of zero.
(Lambda)^0 is one. The factorial
of zero is one, as we just mentioned.
So the P(y = 0) is simply equal to e^(-Lambda).
If Lambda is one, this probability is simply e^-1,
which is 1/e or 1/2.718,
which is approximately 0.37 or 37%,
as is also illustrated in this plot here,
for Lambda = 1 and the k = 0.
If Lambda takes a different value, say 4,
then this probability is equal to e^-4,
which is about 0.018 or 1.8%,
as is illustrated here for Lambda = 4.
Now, what if k takes a different count value,
let's say k = 1?
Then the P(y = 1), again,
following the defining expression is equal
to (Lambda)^1 times e^(-Lambda),
divided by the factorial of 1.
The factorial of 1 is 1.
So this expression simplifies to Lambda*e^(-Lambda).
Again, depending on the value of that parameter Lambda,
we can easily calculate the value of this probability.
For example, if Lambda = 1,
then this probability is simply e^-1,
which is the same as
the probability above, as we can see here.
If Lambda is four,
then this probability becomes 4*e^-4,
which is about 7.3%,
as is illustrated here.
Following the same fashion,
we can derive the probability of y being equal
to any other count value based on this expression.
And such a series of
probability measures define a Poisson distribution.
Notice that this series of
probability measures depends on the parameter Lambda.
As we can see here, given
a particular parameter Lambda's value,
we have a different series of probability measures.
In other words, the Poisson distribution takes
different shapes under different Lambda values.
Notice that the Poisson distribution is
defined over non-negative count values only.
So k can only be integers greater than or equal to zero.
Now, how can we say for sure that the values calculated
based on this expression constitute
a valid probability distribution?
Recall that in order for this series of
values to be a valid probability distribution,
two requirements need to be met.
The first requirement is that
all these values need to be non-negative.
This can be easily verified
because each component of
this expression is non-negative.
The second requirement is that
all these probabilities need to be summed to one.
This is actually less obvious and harder to verify.
We won't get into the mathematical proof here,
but just tell you the result.
Magically, if we add up the values of
this expression for k = 0,
1, 2, 3,
and all the way to infinity,
the sum is exactly one.
This is a fascinating result,
and we can rigorously prove it mathematically.
It holds regardless of the value of Lambda.
In other words, given any positive Lambda value,
the entire series of probabilities
generated by this expression add up to one.
Very magical and interesting.
This makes the Poisson distribution defined
as this a valid probability distribution.
Now, an important property of the Poisson distribution.
As we can mathematically derive,
the expected value of a random variable
following a Poisson distribution is equal to Lambda.
And interestingly, the variance of
that random variable is also equal to Lambda.
In other words, for a Poisson distribution,
its variance is equal to its mean,
both of which are equal to the key parameter Lambda.
Note that this property has
very important implications as we'll revisit soon.
Having understood the Poisson distribution,
we can now introduce that Poisson regression model.
Simply put, in a Poisson regression model,
we assume that dependent variable y
follows the Poisson distribution where
the parameter Lambda is modeled as
a function of all independent or x variables.
We may want to model Lambda as simply equal to
the usual linear combination
of x variables and the Beta coefficients.
However, remember that Lambda has to always be positive.
But x variables and
the Beta coefficients can take all kinds of values,
and there's no guarantee that the X,
Beta combination will always be positive.
So to come up with a function of
X and Beta that will always be positive,
here is a trick that we often use.
We will wrap the usual linear combination of X and Beta
with an exponential function as we see here.
We use the usual XBeta expression as the shorthand of
Beta_0+Beta_1x_1+ Beta_2x_2 plus etc.
We'll then let the Lambda parameter be
equal to the exponential of X Beta.
Notice that here, exp is
just another way of
writing the usual exponential function.
It just enables us to write
the entire function on
one line rather than using the superscript.
So exp(X Beta) simply means the same as e^(X Beta).
The reasons to introduce
the exponential transformation here are first,
the exponential function is an increasing function.
So the exponential of
XBeta increases with the XBeta value.
As a result, the exponential transformation preserves
the relative magnitudes of the original XBeta values.
Second, more importantly,
the exponential function always returns a positive value.
The XBeta value can be either positive or negative,
but the exponential of XBeta will always be positive.
This helps satisfy the positive constraint for
the Lambda parameter and makes
the model specified this way a valid model.
So in this way, we have
developed our Poisson regression model.
Again, we let the dependent variable
y follow the Poisson distribution
with the parameter Lambda being equal to
the exponential of XBeta combination.
Recall that the expected value of y following
the Poisson distribution is equal to Lambda.
Therefore, essentially,
the Poisson regression model
assumes that expected value of
y given the x variable values is equal
to the exponential of the XBeta combination.
And this is the core of the Poisson regression model.
It is actually very similar
to that linear regression model,
where we assume the expected value of y is
simply equal to the XBeta combination itself.
But here, for Poisson regression models,
we let the expected value of y equal
the exponential of XBeta combination.
Now, because y follows the Poisson distribution,
it's very easy for us to write down that probability of
y being equal to any non-negative count value.
Just apply the Poisson probability expression with
Lambda replaced by the exponential of XBeta.
As a result, it's straightforward for us to
derive the likelihood function
for a Poisson regression model.
The likelihood of observing the y value is
simply the probability of
y taking that particular count value,
which is just the same
Poisson probability expression we just saw.
We'll use the maximum likelihood estimation
or MLE to estimate a Poisson regression model.
We could directly maximize
the likelihood we just derived.
However, in practice, we
can make it even more computationally
efficient by first taking
the logarithm of the likelihood of function,
and then maximizing the loglikelihood of function.
Notice that because the log function
is an increasing function,
so the log transformation preserves
the relative magnitudes of
the original likelihood function values.
Therefore, the model parameter values that maximize
the log likelihood function
also maximize the original likelihood function.
Therefore, the two forms of
objective functions will yield
the same estimation results
and are hence equivalent in this regard.
To see how the log transformation can
help simplify the expression and the computation,
let's take the logarithm of this likelihood function.
Applying the rules of logarithms,
multiplication turns into addition,
division turns into subtraction,
and exponentiation turns into multiplication.
>> Therefore, the logarithm of this likelihood turns
into the log of the first component,
plus the log of the second component,
minus the log of the third component.
We can further simplify that expression.
After logarithm, exponentiation turns into multiplication
so this exponent becomes
a multiplicative coefficient in the front.
Notice that logarithm and exponential cancel each other
out so we only have the x Beta left here.
Similarly, for the second part,
logarithm and exponential cancel each other out so we
only have minus exponential of x Beta left here.
Notice that the last part does
not contain any Beta coefficients,
which are the unknown here for estimation.
Therefore, the last term is simply a constant,
and it will not affect the optimization result
at all so we can safely throw it away.
As a result, we can write
the log-likelihood function as this.
Just y*x Beta minus the exponential of x Beta.
Here, we use the tilde sign to
represent that the log-likelihood is not
exactly equal to the expression on
the right because we have thrown away a constant term,
but it's increasing in this expression and hence
equivalent for the purpose of MLE optimization.
This is the log function for one observation I.
The overall log-likelihood function
of all observations in the data
is simply that sum of
the log-likelihood of each observation.
Here, it's the sum because it's the log-likelihood.
The overall likelihood function is
the product of the likelihood of each observation,
but the overall log likelihood function is in term
the sum of the log likelihood of each observation.
As a result, we can simply use this expression as
the objective function and to perform
that maximum likelihood estimation.
Same as before, we will numerically search for the set of
Beta coefficient values that will
maximize this objective functions value.
And the dataset of Beta coefficient values are
the MLE estimate of our Poisson regression model.
Having explained how to
estimate the Poisson regression model,
we'll next discuss how to
interpret the model estimation results.
We'll discuss the usual partial or marginal effects.
Because the Poisson regression model
is a non-linear model,
so the partial effect will not simply be equal
to the Beta coefficient as in a linear regression model.
However, it's important to note that
the Beta coefficient in
a Poisson regression model has a direct interpretation.
This is because of the special functional structure
of the Poisson regression model,
the so called log linear structure.
Recall that in a Poisson regression model,
the expected value of y given x is modeled
as equal to the exponential of the x Beta combination.
As a result, if we take
the logarism on both sides of this equation,
what we get is that
the logarithm of the expected value of
y is equal to
the linear combination of x's and the Betas.
In other words, the log of the expected y is linear in x.
This is the so called log linear structure.
Given such a structure,
if we take the partial derivative
with respect to a certain x variable,
say x_j on both sides of the equation,
what we have on the right is
just a coefficient for Beta_j.
And what we have on the left is the partial derivative of
the log of the expected y with respect to x_j,
which can be further derived following
the chain rule of partial derivative.
We first take that partial derivative
of that logarithm function,
which gives us one over the expected y.
We then take the partial derivative of
the expected y with respect to x_j,
and then multiply these two parts together.
Now, this expression on the left
actually has a direct interpretation.
If we look at this part,
it represents the small change
in the expected value of y caused by
a small change in x_j
divided by the original value of the expected y.
Now, think, what does this mean?
It represents the percentage change in
the expected value of y caused by a small change in x_j.
In other words, in the Poisson regression model,
the Beta coefficients have direct interpretations.
Beta_j measures the percentage change of
the expected value of y when
a particular x variable x_j increases by one unit.
For example, if Beta_j is equal to 0.25,
it means if x_j increases by one unit,
the expected value of y,
the counter value of interest
will increase by roughly 25%.
This is a very neat and a nice interpretation
of Beta coefficients in a Poisson regression model,
and then an important feature to keep in mind.
We can of course, also derive
the usual partial or marginal effect
according to the definition.
That is the absolute amount of change in
the expected value of y caused
by one unit of change in x_j.
Following the definition, take
the partial derivative of the expected value of y,
which is equal to the exponential of
x Beta with respect to x_j.
Again, applying that chain rule of partial derivative.
That partial derivative of
the exponential function is
the exponential function itself,
and the partial derivative of x Beta with
respect to x_j is simply Beta_j.
Therefore, that partial effect of x_j is equal to
Beta_j multiplied by a coefficient
equal to the exponential of x Beta.
As we said, because
the Poisson regression model is non linear,
so the partial effect is not equal to Beta_j directly.
However, as we can see,
the partial effect still has
a clean expression and it can be easily calculated.
Note that the partial effect depends
on the values of all x variables.
Therefore, in order to determine the partial effect,
we have to specify the values of all x variables.
Now, what x variable values should we use?
Well, if we want to investigate
the partial effect for a particular individual,
we can simply use the x values of that individual.
More often, however, we usually like to evaluate
the partial effects on
an average level across all individuals in our sample.
In that case, we can calculate
the average partial effect or APE.
That is, first calculate the partial effect for
each individual by substituting
each individual's x values,
and then average the partial effect
over all individuals in the data sample,
and then average value gives us the APE,
which measures on average
among all individuals in our data sample,
what is the partial effect
of a particular x variable x_j?
Notice that due to
the functional structure of the Poisson regression model,
the APE calculation can be
further simplified to be equal to
the estimated Beta_j value
times the average y value in the data sample.
This last equality is due to
the first order condition in the MLE estimation.
I'll skip the detail,
the mathematical derivation here,
but the result is certainly worth noting.
As we can see, the average partial effect in
a Poisson regression model can be very easily calculated.
After estimating the model,
we already have the Beta_j estimate,
and we just need to multiply it by
the average value of y in the data,
which will give us the APE for x_j.
Intuitively, this also makes a lot of sense.
As we just discussed,
Beta_j has that direct interpretation as
the percentage change in
the expected value of y
caused by one unit increase of x_j.
Now, multiplying Beta_j by
the average value of y gives us
the absolute amount of the change in
the expected y as x_j increases by one unit,
which is exactly what the partial effect
measures so everything is nicely coherent.
Finally, let's discuss an important limitation
of the Poisson regression model.
Recall that, as we mentioned previously,
the Poisson distribution has an important property.
That is the variance is equal to the mean,
both of which are equal to the parameter Lambda.
In a Poisson regression model,
because we assume that dependent variable
y follows a Poisson distribution,
we are essentially assuming that the variance of y
should be equal to the expected value
or the mean value of y.
Well, if this is really the case
in our data, then that's great.
The Poisson regression model is
a perfect fit to our data.
However, in reality, this oftentimes does not hold.
In real data samples,
a common case would be that
the variance of the outcome variable y
is significantly greater than
the expected or mean value of y.
This is referred to as the overdispersion case.
Similarly, we may have the opposite case as well,
where the variance of y is
significantly less than the mean value of y,
which is referred to as the underdispersion case.
Of course, in practice,
underdispersion is relatively rare
and overdispersion happens more
often than underdispersion,
so our main focus will be on overdispersion.
If there is notable overdispersion in your data,
then Poisson regression model may not be a good fit,
and we may need to consider some alternative model
to model the data as we'll introduce later.
Now, how to examine
whether there is overdispersion in the data?
There are some formal tests,
but we'd like to introduce a simple statistic that we can
easily compute to examine
the existence of overdispersion.
That is the dispersion parameter Sigma squared.
To understand it, let's write
the variance of y as equal to
the expected value of y
times the dispersion parameter Sigma square.
Essentially, Sigma square is the ratio
between the variance of y and the expected value of y.
Notice that the ratio is non-negative by definition,
because y is a non-negative counter variable,
so both its expected value
and the variance are non-negative.
By definition, if Sigma square
is significantly greater than 1,
then there is overdispersion.
If Sigma square is significantly less than 1,
then there is underdispersion,
and if Sigma square is equal to or very close to one,
then we are good and the Poisson model is a good fit.
To estimate the Sigma squared,
we can compute this statistic
based on the data in our sample.
Here, y_i is the y value of observation i. Y^_i is
defined as the exponential of
the combination of x_i and the Beta estimates.
In other words, y^_i is
the expected count outcome for observation i.
So the denominator here is
just an estimate of the expected value of y.
And the numerator here measures
the deviation of the actual y from its expected value,
which reflects the definition of variance.
Therefore, this expression constitutes an estimate of
the ratio between the variance
of y and the expected value of y,
which is the dispersion parameter Sigma squared.
Here, n is the total number
of observations in the data sample,
and the k is the number of x variables.
And this divisor here is
the so called degree of freedom adjustment,
given that we are using
the estimated mean rather than the actual mean.
In practice, however, it doesn't really
matter much because usually
the total number of observations
is much larger than the number
of x variables so n is dominating here,
1/n-k-1 is very close to 1/n.
Therefore, for all practical purposes,
you can pretty much ignore
the degree of freedom adjustment
and simply think of this expression as just 1/n,
which makes the whole expression a standard average.
In short, this expression gives us
a consistent estimate of
the dispersion parameter Sigma square.
Notice that it is readily
available after we estimate the Poisson regression model.
Y^_i's are readily available as
the output of the Poisson model estimation,
and the y_i's are just y variable values in the data,
therefore, we can easily calculate this statistic.
If it turns out to be notably greater than 1,
then there is overdispersion in the data
and the Poisson regression model may not be a good fit,
which prompts us to consider
alternative models as our next topic.
That's all we want to discuss about the Poisson model.
To quickly sum up, in this video,
we first introduced the Poisson distribution,
a very useful discrete probability distribution,
based on which the Poisson regression model is developed.
We then introduced the framework of
a Poisson regression model and its estimation approach.
We discussed the interpretation of
a Poisson regression model in terms of
both the direct interpretation of
Beta coefficients and the usual partial effects.
We further discussed
an important limitation of Poisson models,
that is it cannot account
for the overdispersion in the data.
We introduced that simple statistic
to help examine potential overdispersion.
Hope this video gives you a good idea of
data problems and how to model them properly.
That's all for this video. Thanks for watching.