>> Hello, everyone. Welcome back.
In this video, we'll continue
our discussion on Count Data Models.
We have introduced the Poisson regression model for
the scenarios where the dependent variable
takes non negative count values.
As we mentioned, one limitation of
a Poisson regression model is that it implicitly
assumes the variance of the y variable is
the same as the expected or mean value of y.
As a result, Poisson regression models
cannot account for the so called overdispersion pattern,
where the variance of y is
greater than the expected value of y,
which is a phenomenon
commonly observed in real world data.
In this video, we're going to extend
the Poisson regression framework
to account for overdispersion.
We'll introduce the so called negative binomial model,
which extends the Poisson model
by adding individual random effects.
As we will show, a negative binomial model reduces to
a Poisson model in the extreme case
when individual render effects completely disappear.
In all other cases,
a negative binomial model will have the variance of
y being greater than its expected value.
Making the negative binomial model
well suited to address over
dispersion in the data. Let's get started.
In this video, we'll first introduce the development of
the negative binomial modeling framework and
explain its Gamma-Poisson mixture structure in detail.
We'll then discuss the connection and the differences
between negative Binomial and Poisson models.
Finally, we'll quickly discuss
some commonly used likelihood
based goodness of fit measures to
evaluate and compare the performances of models estimated
by the maximum likelihood estimation or MLE approach,
such as the count data models.
We have introduced in great detail
the Poisson regression model
designed to handle count data problems.
As we explained, one limitation of
a Poisson regression model is that it
implicitly assumes the variance of
the y variable is the same as its expected value.
As a result, if there's over dispersion in the data,
that is the variance of y is
greater than the expected value of y,
which is common in practice,
a Poisson regression model may not be a good fit.
To properly account for overdispersion,
one idea is to introduce
the so called individual random effects
into the Poisson model framework.
Recall that in the Poisson regression model,
we assume for each individual observation I,
the count outcome y_i
follows the Poisson distribution with
the mean parameter equal to
the exponential of the usual x and Beta combination.
As we know, such a setting
will not be able to make the variance
of y large enough to fit the overdispersion data pattern.
Therefore, to better accommodate overdispersion,
what we can do is to add an additional level of variation
or heterogeneity into the mean parameter
of the Poisson distribution.
More specifically, the original Lambda parameter of
the Poisson distribution can be
revised and be modeled as the product of two parts.
The second part denoted as
Mu_i is the deterministic part.
It is just like the original Lambda parameter
and it is modeled as a function of the x variables,
the exponential of x Beta.
The first part denoted as
Mu_i is the newly added individual rendered coefficient.
This parameter is not really
observable and is just an auxillary parameter
introduced to facilitate the development of
the model to account for the added level of dispersion.
Mu_i is allowed to be individually
different So for each individual i,
Mu_i is assumed to be
randomly drawn from a certain distribution.
This is what gives its name,
the individual random coefficient.
This coefficient is individually
specific and its value is randomly realized,
drawn from a common distribution.
Which new randomly join?
New i multiplied by Mu_i
together form the mean parameter
of the Poisson distribution.
So the expect the value of y_i is now modeled as equal
to Mu_i times the exponential of x Beta.
This gives us the basic framework
of the so called negative binomial model.
Now, what probability distribution should we
choose for that random coefficient Mu_i to follow?
Notice that the mean parameter
of the Poisson distribution has to be
positive so Mu_i has to be positive as well.
This means the distribution has to
be defined over positive values only.
So we cannot choose
distributions like the normal distribution,
where the realized the values
can be either positive or negative.
A very flexible distribution family defined over
positive values that we often
use is the so called Gamma distribution.
The probability density function or
the PDF for Gamma distribution is as this.
As we can see, the general form of
Gamma distribution has two parameters.
Alpha, the shape parameter, and the Beta,
the scale or rate parameter,
both of which need to be positive.
This function is called the Gamma function.
It is a deterministic function and it can be viewed as
a generalization of the factorial into real values.
Here, I plotted the PDF functions of
Gamma distributions in the different Alpha
and Beta parameter values.
As we can see, Gamma distribution
is defined over positive values only,
and the distribution is very flexible in
the different combinations of
the two parameters to fit different distribution shapes.
Therefore, Gamma distribution is
a very suitable candidate for us
to use as the distribution for
the individual random coefficient Mu_i.
We therefore model Mu_i
as following a Gamma distribution.
To keep the model simple,
we adopt a simplified version
of the Gamma distribution by letting
the two parameters Alpha and Beta be the
same and denoted as Theta instead,
which needs to be positive as well.
As a result, the PDF of
the Gamma distribution simplifies to
this form with both Alpha and Beta equal to Theta.
Notice that as we can show,
the expected value of a random variable following
a general Gamma distribution is Alpha over Beta,
and the variance is Alpha over Beta squared.
Accordingly, in the simplified
the Gamma distribution here,
because Alpha is equal to Beta and denoted as Theta so
the expected value becomes
1 and the variance becomes 1/Theta.
Now, here is an important point.
Pay attention to the role Theta plays in the model.
As we can see here, Theta determines
the inverse of the variance of Mu.
Recall that the Theta is always greater than zero.
So when Theta is small and very close to zero,
1/Theta is very large,
which means there is a large variance
in the possible values of Mu.
In other words, we introduced a large degree of
individual variation or heterogeneity into the model,
which can account for
significant over dispersion in the data.
On the contrary, if Theta is very large,
then 1/Theta becomes very
small so the variance of Mu is small.
In the extreme case, when
Theta goes to positive infinity,
then 1/Theta goes to 0.
As a result, the variance of Mu reduces to 0.
So no more variation in realized the new values at all.
All realize the new values will
concentrate on the expected value, which is 1.
As a result, the expected value of each y_i
will reduce to 1 times the exponential of x Beta,
which is just like what we
had in the standard Poisson regression model.
In other words, that negative binomial model
will simply reduce to
the standard Poisson regression model in
the extreme case when Theta goes to infinity.
In this sense, we can already see from here
the important role this
Theta parameter plays in the model.
This is why Theta is referred
to as the dispersion parameter.
A small Theta value means a large degree
of variation in individual count outcomes,
and hence a large degree of overdispersion.
Whereas a large Theta value means
a small degree of individual heterogeneity,
and hence a small degree of overdispersion.
In the extreme case, when Theta goes to infinity,
individual heterogeneity disappears completely
and has no over dispersion at all,
and the model reduces to the Poisson regression model.
This is a very important point to
understand that negative binomial model framework well.
We'll revisit it later soon.
Following the negative binomial framework,
we can derive the probability for the outcome y to be
equal to any count value k. Notice that here,
we suppress all subscript
i's just to keep the notation neat.
Recall that essentially, y is still modeled as following
a Poisson distribution so the probability for y to be
equal to k is still defined
by the Poisson probability expression.
The only difference is that the main parameter,
which was Lambda previously is
now the product of Mu and Mu.
As explained, Mu is
deterministic and is a function of x and Beta.
So Mu is known given each individual's x values.
What is tricky is Mu,
Mu is a random coefficient,
whose actual value is not observable and we just
know that its value is
randomly drawn from the Gamma distribution.
In this sense, as we derive
the probability of y equal to a certain value,
we can only derive the probability in expectation.
That is by taking the expectation over
the possible values of
the unobserved Mu according to its distribution.
Mathematically we'll integrate this Poisson probability,
which involves the realized the value of
u over the distribution of possible Mu values,
which is the Gamma distribution as we just introduced.
So this is the PDF of the Gamma distribution.
Integrating this expression over
all possible values of Mu from 0 to positive infinity,
will give us the probability of y = k in
expectation over all possible values
of the individual random coefficient Mu.
This integral, which seems very complex,
actually can be integrated out in a close form,
thanks to the special functional forms
of the Poisson and the Gamma distributions.
This is actually also the reason
why we pick a Gamma distribution as
the distribution family for Mu
because it works well with the Poisson probabilities.
We'll skip the detailed derivation here,
but I encourage those who are interested to
go through the mathematical derivation on your own,
which can help further deepen your understanding.
Eventually, we can derive
this entire probability into this close form expression.
As we can see, all components here are known.
This is the Gamma function,
which, as we mentioned,
is a deterministic function,
and it can be viewed as a generalization
of the factorial into real values.
K is the given countervalue,
and Theta and Mu are the two key parameters.
The probability distribution defined
according to this expression,
is called negative binomial distribution.
Just like the Poisson distribution,
the negative binomial distribution
is a discrete distribution.
So the random variable involved
can only take discrete values,
more specifically non negative integer values.
For a random variable following
a negative binomial distribution,
the probability of it taking
any count value can be determined by this expression.
As we see, a negative binomial distribution
has two parameters.
Theta is called the dispersion parameter,
as it is the inverse of
that variance of the Gamma distribution,
as we just explain and the Mu is called
the mean parameter because it determines
the core part of the mean of the Poisson distribution.
>> As we see, because
the negative binomial model is the outcome of
integrating individual random coefficients
following the Gamma distribution into a Poisson model,
it's often referred to as a Gamma-Poisson mixture model.
Just like the Poisson regression model,
to incorporate x variables into
the negative binomial model framework,
we simply let the mean parameter, Mu,
equal the exponential of the x and Beta combination.
Again, we use the exponential function here to
ensure that Mu is always positive.
Just replace Mu with the exponential of x Beta,
we can dive the probability of the outcome y equal to
a certain counter value in
a negative binomial regression model as this,
where Theta is that dispersion parameter,
and that mean parameter is
replaced with the exponential of x Beta,
with the Betas being
the usual coefficients for x variables.
This probability also defines
the likelihood for one single observation,
the overall likelihood function is
just the product of
the likelihood of all observations in the data set.
Similarly as before, we can estimate
the negative binomial regression model using
the maximum likelihood estimation or MLE.
Again, by numerically for searching for the set of
parameter values that will maximize
the value of the overall likelihood function.
Notice that the unknown parameters to estimate in
a negative binomial regression model
included the usual Beta coefficients for x variables,
and the dispersion parameter Theta.
One quick side note for those of you who are curious
about why this distribution
is called negative binomial distribution.
It is called a negative binomial because,
this probability expression resembles
the probability of the number of failures we'll
observe before a certain predefined number of
successes have occurred in repeated Bernoulli trials.
Binomial corresponds to the nature
of repeated Bernoulli trials,
which are just like coin tosses.
And the negative corresponds to the fact that
the probability is for the number
of failures rather than successes,
which is hence opposite to
the usual binomial distribution.
Having understood the details
of the negative binomial model,
let's summarize this part of
the introduction by discussing
the extreme case of
a negative binomial model to see
its connection with that Poisson model.
Recall that, this is
the negative binomial probability expression.
And we can rewrite it as
this following some straightforward reorganization.
Now, if we let
the dispersion parameter Theta go to infinity,
let's see what this expression will transform into.
I'll leave the detailed mathematics
for your own exercise,
and only quickly point out
the logic and the results here.
Recall that the Gamma function
is similar to the factorial.
So the difference between these two Gamma functions is
the product of k factors involving Theta.
Now that the Theta is going to infinity,
so Theta plus any finite values all go to infinity.
And therefore, the product of these k factors will
be on the same order as Theta to the power of k,
which will cancel out this term in the limit.
As a result, this expression converts
to one as Theta goes to infinity.
And this expression converge to e
to the power of Mu as Theta goes to infinity,
which is essentially how the e constant is defined.
Therefore, as we can see,
the negative binomial probability expression will
converge to this expression as Theta goes to infinity.
Now, this is exactly the Poisson probability expression.
Therefore, we have shown that in the extreme case,
when the dispersion parameter Theta goes to infinity,
a negative binomial distribution converges
to a Poisson distribution.
We can further understand such a convergent connection by
looking at the variance
of a negative binomial distribution.
As we can derive, the expected value of
a negative binomal distribution
is just that mean parameter Mu,
which is not surprising.
Interestingly, the variance of
a negative binomial distribution is equal
to Mu plus one over Theta times Mu squared.
Because Mu squared and
the Theta are both greater than zero,
so the variance and
negative binomial distribution is
always greater than Mu,
which is the expected value.
In this sense, a negative binomial distribution
is always overdispersed.
And hence, a negative binomial model is
made for the overdispersion scenarios by design.
When Theta is small and very close to zero,
one over Theta becomes very large.
So the second term is very large.
As a result, the variance is
significantly larger than the expected value,
which indicates significant over dispersion in the data.
On the other hand, if Theta is very large,
then one over Theta turns very small, and as a result,
the variance becomes closer to the expected value,
which indicates little overdispersion.
This echoes what we pointed out earlier.
Recall that as we constructed
the negative binomial model based on
the Gamma-Poisson mixture structure,
Theta is the inverse of
the level of individual heterogeneity.
Therefore, a small Theta
indicates great individual heterogeneity,
which corresponds to
a significant degree of overdispersion.
On the contrary, a large Theta
indicates little individual heterogeneity,
which corresponds to a low degree of overdispersion.
In the extreme case, when Theta goes to infinity,
the variance and a negative binomial
distribution converges to Mu,
the same as the expected value,
which is just like the Poisson distribution.
So again, as we see,
as Theta goes to infinity,
overdispersion disappears completely and
a negative binomal distribution
reduces to a Poisson distribution.
This is a very important result to keep in mind,
as we can consistently arrive at from different angles.
Some final words about the connection and
the differences between Poisson
and the negative binomial models.
Notice that in both the Poisson
and the negative binomal models,
the expected value of y given x is the same,
both equal to the exponential of x Beta.
In this sense, even if there is a
significant over dispersion in the data,
and hence a Poisson model is not a good fit,
a Poisson model is still correct
in terms of modeling the expected value of y.
In other words, if our interest is only to
predict the expected value of the count outcome y,
then a Poisson model is actually good enough,
even when there is
a significant overdispersion in the data.
Actually, in this case,
using the Poisson maximum likelihood estimation results
as the model results,
even when the Poisson distribution is
not an entirely correct assumption,
is still considered as a valid approach called
Quasi-Maximum Likelihood Estimation or QMLE.
On the other hand, a negative binomial model
is necessary in the presence of overdispersion,
only when what we are interested
in are not only the expected value of y,
but also the distribution of possible y values.
For example, we want to know what is
the probability of the counter outcome
being equal to a particular value.
In this case, we need to use
that negative binomial model to properly account
for over dispersion in order to
approximate the two distribution well.
Finally, let's quickly mention
some goodness-of-fit measures that we can use to evaluate
the fit of the models estimated by
the maximum likelihood estimation or MLE approach.
As you are probably already familiar with,
two commonly used goodness-of-fit measures of
this kind are AIC and BIC.
Akaike information criterion, which is named after
Japanese statistician and
the Bayesian information criteria.
We often calculated these measures for
different competing models and
compare to see which model fits the data better.
We won't get into the derivation of these measures,
but just to let you know how
these two measures are defined
and what they are essentially about.
As we can see, these two measures
are actually very similar.
Their core is log( L hat),
which is the maximized log likelihood
and an outcome of the MLE estimation.
Intuitively, if a model fits
the data better than another model,
it is supposed to have a higher likelihood
as an outcome of the MLE optimization.
So log(L hat) should be the larger, the better.
But notice that both meshes multiply
the log likelihood by -2.
So it is the opposite of
the maximized log likelihood at play.
As a result, this value should be the smaller the better.
Notice that because likelihood is less than one,
so log likelihood is negative.
And therefore, -2 times log likelihood is positive.
And as we said, we'd like to see
a smaller positive value here.
However, we cannot compare model fit
solely based on the maximized log likelihood.
A model with small parameters
has more degrees of freedom to fit the data.
And as a result, its maximized likelihood,
can unsurprisingly be higher.
In this sense, to ensure
a fair comparison of models
with different number of parameters,
we need to take into account
the number of parameters a model contains.
We should penalize a model with small parameters.
A model with more parameters
can win over a competing model with
fewer parameters only when it can
achieve a significant increase in the likelihood,
which can outweigh the additional number
of parameters introduced into the model.
Both AIC and BIC measures formalize this idea.
They both introduce a term into the measure,
which is increasing with the number of model parameters
k. Recall that we want the whole measure to be small,
so this added term serves as
a penalty for the number of parameters in the model.
A model having more parameters,
will have a larger k value,
and hence a larger penalty term.
It will end up with a lower overall measure only
if it's maximized log likelihood can be higher,
and as a result, the second term is much lower.
Notice that the only difference
between these two measures is
the extent of the penalty they
impose on the number of model parameters.
As we can see, BIC actually imposes
a greater penalty on the number of model parameters.
In BIC, the coefficient for k is log(n),
which is the number of observations in the data set,
which is usually larger than two.
That is the coefficient for k in AIC.
Generally, we'd like to see both AIC and
BIC being smaller in order to
convincingly conclude that one model is better
than another competing model
in terms of the fit to the data.
Late in our exercises we'll calculate
the AIC and BIC for both Poisson and
the negative binomial models to see which model
is a better fit when there
is over dispersion in the data.
This is all we want to introduce
about negative binomial models.
We develop the negative binomal model from
the Gamma-Poisson mixture framework by
adding individual random effects to a Poisson model.
As we point out, negative binomial models are
built to account for over dispersion by design.
And in the extreme case,
when the dispersion parameter Theta goes to infinity,
over dispersion disappears and
the negative binomial model reduces to a Poisson model.
Hope this discussion help
deepen your understanding of the connection and
the differences between these two important types
of count data models.
That's all for this video. Thanks for watching.