>> Hello, everyone. Welcome back.
In this video, we're going to demonstrate how to
implement count data models in R. We'll
start with Poisson regression model and then
investigate whether or not
there is overdispersion in our data.
We then implement the negative binomial model and compare
the two model performance to see how
the negative binomial model can
properly account for overdispersion.
Let's get started. The dataset
we're going to work on for
this demonstration is the more visit data.
A National Shopping Mall chain would like to
analyze customers visit patterns to
better understand what type of customers
are likely to visit their shopping malls more often.
They've compiled a dataset that
consists of the monthly visit records
of 500 customers over the past four years or 15 months.
For each customer, we observe their gender,
income level, and distance
from home to the nearest mall location.
We also observe their monthly visit data,
including the number of visits in each month,
an index measuring the extent of
discounting applied in each month
in the corresponding mall,
and whether or not the customer has received
a targeted promotional email during that month.
Given the count value nature of
the dependent variable visit here,
we need to apply count data models to properly estimate
what factors affect customer's expected frequency
of visits to the mall.
As usual, the data have already been
organized and stored in a CSV file.
Use that read.csv function to read in the data.
Again, be sure to save the data file
under the working directory of R Studio,
or you need to explicitly
specify the full directory as part of the file name.
Read.csv function sets header to be true by default,
so we don't really need to
explicitly specify header to be true.
Save the imported the data into
a data frame variable named myData.
We can call the str function to
check the structure of the imported dataset.
We can also plot the histogram of
the dependent variable visit
to quickly examine its distribution.
Notice that here we set breaks to be
a vector of zero through 10,
meaning we'd like to use values
zero through 10 as the break points.
As we can see, most of its values
concentrate on a few small count numbers,
such as 0, 1, and 2.
Regular linear regression models will be
a pool approximation for count variables like this,
so we need to use
some proper count data models
to perform the analysis here.
Let's start with Poisson regression model.
To apply a Poisson regression model in R,
we can use that glm function,
which is the same glm function
we used for binary response models,
such as the Logit and the Probit models.
This is because Poisson regression models
actually fall under
the same big umbrella of generalized linear models.
The syntax of the glm function is the same as before.
We first specify the model, as usual,
the name of the dependent variable,
tilde, and then the list of independent variables.
We can list all independent variables one by
one and connect them using the plus sign.
Alternatively, we can simply use
a dot to include all the other variables
in the dataset into the model as
the independent variables. That's what we do here.
What's different from binary response models is that
the family argument now needs to be
specified as Poisson instead of binomial.
Specify the data and save the output into a variable.
As usual, we can run a summary to
summarize the estimation results
of that Poisson regression.
As we can see, these are
the coefficient estimates for the Poisson model.
As we discussed, one potential issue of
the Poisson model is that
the variance of the counter variable is
assumed to be the same as the expected value of
the count variable by design
due to the nature of Poisson distribution.
A Poisson model is hence
not a good fit if the data are overdispersed,
meaning that the variance of
the count variable is larger than the expected value.
We can investigate whether or not
our data have the overdispersion pattern using
the dispersion statistic we have introduced as this,
which is an estimate of Sigma square,
the ratio between the variance of
y and the expected value of y.
Here, y hat is the predated value of y,
which is equal to the expected value
of y according to the Poisson model.
That is the exponential of x and Beta,
which is how we set the mean parameter of
the Poisson distribution as
we develop the Poisson regression model.
We can enter this formula in R accordingly.
Y hat can be estimated using the predictor function.
Notice that same as what
we did with binary response models.
If we want to predict the expected y,
which is a nonlinear function of
x Beta in the generalized linear model framework,
we need to specify
the type argument as equal to response.
Otherwise, what we get from
the predictor function would simply
be the linear combination of x and Beta itself.
Extract y from the original data.
Then we can estimate the formula to
calculate the dispersion statistic as this.
Notice that this is the degree of
freedom adjustment as shown in the original formula.
Nrow gives us the number
of rows in the original dataset,
which is the number of
data observations or the n in the original formula.
Coef of Poisson regression results
gives us the vector of coefficient estimates,
and the length of this vector
gives us the number of Beta coefficients,
which is equal to k+1 as in the original formula.
Notice that the number of Beta coefficients is equal to
one plus the number of x variables k,
because there is also the interceptor coefficient,
Beta 0 in the model.
So this part of the expression together is equal
to n-k-1 as in the original formula.
Now, calculate the value of this statistic.
As we can see, for our data,
the dispersion statistic is estimated to be about 1.046,
very close to one, which indicates that for this dataset,
there is actually no overdispersion issue.
As a result, Poisson regression model
can be a good fit for the count data here.
In other contexts, however,
you may have this statistic being much larger than one,
which would then indicate significant overdispersion.
In those cases, we will need to consider extending
the basic Poisson regression model
to account for overdispersion,
and a negative binomial model would be a suitable choice.
Let's next apply
a negative binomial model to our data here.
To apply negative binomial models in R,
we need to use an external package called MASS.
As usual, we need to first download and install
this package using the install.package function.
We'll then use the library function
to load the package into the current R session.
Again, installation needs to be done only once,
but we need to run the library function to load
the package each time we use it in a new R session.
Once the MASS package has been installed and loaded,
we can use the glm.mb function
included in this package to
estimate a negative binomial model.
The syntax for the glm.mb function is quite simple.
Specify the model in the usual format and
then specify the data and save the output.
Notice that the negative binomial model takes
a little while to estimate because we need
to run a numerical search routine to find
that MLE estimates of the model parameters,
and the likelihood function
here is a bit complex to compute.
Now, summarize the estimation output.
As we can see, these are
the estimation results of the negative binomial model.
One important parameter to pay
attention to here is that Theta,
which is the dispersion parameter
of a negative binomial model.
Recall that one over Theta is the variance of
the Gamma distribution for
the individual random effect we
introduced to develop that negative binomial framework.
If Theta is very large, much larger than one,
then one over Theta is close to zero,
and the negative binomial model converts
to a Poisson regression model.
On the other hand, if Theta
is less than one and very small,
then it indicates significant overdispersion.
As we can see here,
Theta is estimated to be over 10,
which is quite large, and as a result,
we can conclude that there is
little evidence of overdispersion in this dataset,
which is consistent with what we
found from the previous analysis.
In this sense, the negative binomial model should be
pretty close to the Poisson model in this example.
We can quickly verify this by
comparing the goodness-of-fit measures,
AIC and BIC across the two models.
Simply call the AIC and BIC functions to
calculate the AIC and BIC for the two models.
We can co-list them side by
side using the cbind function.
Notice that for AIC or BIC,
the smaller the better, as we can see here,
both the Poisson regression model and
the negative binomial model have
almost the same AIC and BIC measures
indicating the two models fit performance is pretty
close as a result of
the lack of overdispersion in this example.
The last task we'd like to
perform to help you better understand
the concepts of count data models is to plot
that probability density function
according to the Poisson or the negative binomial models.
We'd like to plot that probabilities of
the dependent count variable taking
different possible count values from 0,
1, 2, and onward.
This can help you better understand
the discrete probability density functions
for count data models,
and also allows us to compare
the probability distributions according
to the two different models.
To create such a plot,
we can calculate the probabilities of
observing different count values based on
that probability density function of
the corresponding Poisson or
negative binomial distributions.
Notice that in Poisson or negative binomial regression,
the mean parameter is modeled as
the exponential of x Beta,
which depends on the values of the x variables.
For this reason, we need to specify the values of
the x variables at which
we'd like to evaluate the probabilities.
A natural choice would be choosing
the mean values of the x variables in the data.
We can simply calculate the mean values of
all x variables in the data using the colMeans function.
Here, we only include the second through
the six columns as they are the x varables,
whereas the first column is used as the y variable.
Next, we calculate the value of the linear combination
of x Beta evaluated at these x values.
We first retrieve the coefficient mates from each of
the two models and multiply them
with the x bar values we just calculated.
Using the cross product function.
Here, we include one in addition to all the x bar values,
just to correspond to the intercept coefficient Beta 0.
The output of this expression is
simply the usual Beta 0 plus
Beta 1 times x1 plus Beta 2 times
x2 plus all the way through Beta k times xk.
We calculated the x Beta values for
both the Poisson regression model and
the negative binomial model and save them separately.
We then create a vector from
0-10 to represent the different count values,
whose probabilities we'd like to plot.
For each count value or k value,
the probability of observing
such a value is simply that probability according to
the Poisson or the negative binomial distributions
with their respective distribution parameters.
For that Poisson model,
the distribution parameter is the mean parameter,
which is equal to the exponential
of x Beta as we just calculated.
We can use the dpois function to
get that probability density
according to that Poisson distribution.
Recall, as we explained previously,
the d function is one of the series
of four functions we have in
R for each known distribution.
Dpois gives us
that density function of Poisson distribution.
And accordingly, dnbinom
gives us that density function
of that negative binomial distribution.
So this statement gives us the probability for
all the different count values in
the k vector according to the Poisson distribution,
whose mean parameter is equal to this much.
We can take a quick look at the calculated probabilities.
As we can see, they are all probability values,
which are between zero and one.
We can obtain the probabilities from
the negative binomial model in the same fashion.
Use the dnbinom function
to get the density function
of the negative binomial distribution.
Notice that the negative binomial distribution has
two distribution parameters:
the mean parameter and the dispersion parameter.
The mean parameter is specified by the Mu argument and is
equal to the exponential of
x Beta as we calculated previously.
The dispersion parameter is
specified by the size argument,
whose value should be set to
the Theta estimator from
the negative binomial regression above.
Again, this statement gives us
the probabilities for all the different count values in
the k vector according to
the negative binomial distribution
with these two distribution parameters.
We can also take a quick look
at the calculated probabilities,
which are valid probability measures
between zero and one.
We can then plot these calculated probabilities
using the usual plot function.
We'd like to plot the probability distributions from
both models on the same plot for easy comparison.
We can distinguish the two series of
probability values using two different types
of points on the plot.
We can actually plot either series of
probabilities first, but here,
we first plot the probabilities from
the negative binomial model
because the maximum value in that series is
greater and plotting that series first will ensure
that the range of the y-axis of the plot is properly set.
As usual, the first two arguments of the plot function
specify the vectors of x
values and y values sequentially.
The pch argument specifies
the point character and code
16 here corresponds to solid wrong dots.
We specify the labels for the x and
y-axis in the xlab and ylab arguments.
Run this statement, and we plot the probabilities for
different count values from
0-10 according to the negative binomial model.
We can then add the probability values from
the Poisson model onto
the same plot by using the points function.
Similarly, supply the vectors of
x values and y values in order.
The point character is left as default,
which will be Code 1,
corresponding to hollow dots.
We can further add legends to the plot
to note the two series of dots.
As we can see from this plot,
for an average customer with the mean x variable values,
the probability of him or her having
zero visit to a mall in a month is over 60%,
the probability of him or her visiting
a mall once is about 30%,
and the probability of him or her having
more than three visits in a month is very small.
Notice that the probability distributions
from the two models are very close to each other here.
This is not surprising given that there is
little overdispersion in our data for this example here,
so the two models are
supposed to be very close to each other.
However, if there is
significant overdispersion in the data,
then the negative binomial model
will diverge from the Poisson model,
and the resulting probability
distributions will be different.
These are all we want to
demonstrate for the count data models.
Hope this example can help you
better understand the key concepts for this topic.
It should also be helpful for you
to work on the homework exercise.
That's all for this video. Thanks for watching.