>> Hello, everyone. Welcome back.
In the previous video, we provided
an overview of survival models,
and introduced one commonly used framework
to specify survival models.
That is the proportional hazard model.
In a proportional hazard model,
the hazard function is modeled
as two parts multiplied together.
One part is the coefficient term,
which is a function of the independent x variables.
The other part is the baseline hazard,
which is a function of time
and does not contain any x variable.
How we specify the baseline hazard function
determines what survival model will have.
In this video, we're going to introduce
what commonly applied baseline hazard specification,
the Weibull function.
We'll discuss how
a Weibull proportional hazard model is constructed,
estimated, and interpreted. Let's get started.
In this video, we'll
start with the Weibull distribution,
which is used to model the distribution of the duration,
and based on which the baseline hazard is derived,
and the Weibull proportional hazard model is constructed.
We'll then discuss how to
interpret the Weibull model coefficients,
and how to use the proper r package
to perform survival analysis.
Let's start with introducing
this particular distribution family
called Weibull distribution.
We'll use this distribution family to model
the distribution of the duration
in Weibull proportional hazard models.
Weibull distribution is a probability distribution
defined over positive values,
which makes it suitable
as the distribution of the duration,
which by definition should be positive.
Just like any other distributions we have introduced,
to characterize Weibull distribution,
we can specify either the probability density function,
the PDF, or
the cumulative distribution function, the CDF.
This is the PDF of a Weibull distribution.
If you read the different test books,
you may see different forms of Weibull PDF.
Here, I list three versions of
Weibull PDF that you may often find in different sources.
These may seem confusing,
but they are just different versions of
parameterization of that same function,
which can be easily shown to be equivalent to each
other after some transformation of parameters.
For consistency and to avoid confusion,
I'll follow the standard version of parameterization and
stick with this form of
expression for the Weibull PDF function,
which can also be written as this.
Notice that here, t is
the possible realized value of the focal random variable.
And a and b are
the two parameters of the Weibull distribution.
Both of them need to be greater than zero.
An a is often referred to as
the shape parameter because
it determines the shape of the distribution.
And b is called the scale parameter
because it determines the scale of the distribution.
This plot shows the probability density functions of
Weibull distributions under different a and b values.
As we can see, Weibull distribution
is defined over positive values.
And under different combinations of a and b values,
a Weibull distribution can take
very flexible shapes to
fit different patterns in the data.
Therefore, Weibull distribution is
a very flexible and useful distribution family.
As we said, given the PDF function,
we can derive the CDF function
and also the hazard function accordingly.
So here are the PDF
and the hazard function of Weibull distribution,
and we'll later construct the baseline hazard of
a Weibull proportional Hazen model, baseline dysfunction.
As we said, in the Weibull distribution,
parameter a is called
the shape parameter because
its value determines the shape of the distribution.
If a = 1,
then the exponent of t = 0.
As a result, the hazard function no longer depends on
time t. So the hazard simply reduces to a constant,
which is equal to b^-1
by substituting a = 1 in to the Weibull PDF.
In other words, when the shape parameter a = 1,
the Weibull distribution reduces
to the constant hazard case.
As we introduced previously,
when the hazard is a constant,
the corresponding distribution of
the duration is the exponential distribution.
In other words, when the shape parameter a = 1,
the Weibull distribution reduces
to the exponential distribution.
When a > 1,
however, the exponent is positive,
so that hazard function is increasing in
time t. This is
what we refer to as positive duration dependence.
It means the longer an individual has survived,
the greater the probability
this individual will "die" instantaneously.
An example of positive duration dependence
is the typical operational patterns of machines.
The longer a machine has been operating normally.
Usually, it is more likely some part of it
may wear out causing it to stop work.
On the contrary, if a < one,
since a is always positive,
so a is between 0-1.
And then this exponent is negative.
As a result, the hazard function
will be decreasing in time t,
which is what we refer to
as negative duration dependence.
That is, the longer an individual has survived,
the lower the probability,
this individual will "die".
An example of negative duration dependence will be
the post surgery survival pattern for some diseases.
If a patient survives past
the initial period of time after the surgery,
which is usually the most critical and risky,
the chance of that patient keeps surviving increases.
Graphically, we can plot
how the hazard function changes in
time when the shape parameter takes different values.
When a = 1, the hazard function is
a constant and does not change with time at all.
When a > 1,
the hazard function increases with time,
and we have positive duration dependence.
When a < 1,
the hazard function decreases with time,
and we have negative duration dependence.
A useful side note before we proceed.
Recall that we already know
the CDF function of the Weibull distribution.
So we can easily derive the survival function s(t),
which is just 1 - f(t) as this.
If we take the logarithm
twice on both sides of this equation,
what we get is this equation.
Notice that we need to take the opposite here,
because after taking the first logarithm,
the value we get is negative.
So we need to take the opposite to turn it
positive before we can take the second logarithm.
Now, the value of this equation is that,
as we can see here, for a Weibull distribution,
the log-log of the survival function
is actually linear in the log of time.
This property is actually what we
often utilize to examine
whether the data follow
a Weibull distribution reasonably well or not.
What we can do is to first empirically estimate
the survival function based on
the distribution of the duration or observed in the data,
and then plot the values
of log-log of the survival function
against the log of time to
see whether they fit to a straight line or not.
If these data points lie closely along a straight line,
it suggests the Weibull distribution
is a good distribution to assume.
Otherwise, the Weibull distribution
may not fit the data well.
Having understood the Weibull distribution,
we can then construct
that Weibull proportional hazard model
to incorporate x variables.
As introduced, a proportional hazard model specifies
the hazard function as the product of
a coefficient term and the baseline hazard.
For the baseline hazard,
we now use the Weibull hazard.
We use a simplified version by setting
the scale parameter b = 1.
So the baseline hazard,
Lambda 0, is simply a.t^a-1.
For the multiplicative coefficient term,
we use the standard specification and set it to
be the exponential of the usual x and Beta combination.
To ensure that coefficient term is
always positive as we discussed previously.
And this is the specification of
the hazard function for
a Weibull proportional hazard model.
The hazard function changes with time
according to the Weibull hazard as we discussed,
and different individuals hazards are proportional
to each other based on their x variable values.
One important property to point out here is
that not only the baseline hazard
itself is a Weibull hazard.
The full hazard is also a Weibull hazard.
If we view this expression as that scale parameter b,
and then e^x Beta is simply b^-a,
which makes this full hazard
function a Weibull hazard function,
as we derived previously.
Therefore, we have a very important property.
If we use Weibull distribution
to specify the baseline hazard,
then the full hazard also follows a Weibull distribution.
We can also say that the Weibull distribution family
is closed under the proportional hazard specification.
This property is very helpful because now
that the full hazard also follows a known distribution,
then the PDF and the CDF of
the duration distribution can
be easily derived in closed forms.
Recall that this is
the PDF and the CDF of a Weibull distribution.
We now just need to replace b^-a with e^x Beta,
which will give us the PDF and the CDF for
the duration distribution in
the Weibull proportional hazard model.
And as we explained previously,
the PDF and CDF of
the duration distribution
determine the likelihood function.
Then the likelihood of observing and uncensored duration
is just equal to the PDF function
evaluated at that duration value.
And the likelihood of observing a censored duration is
one minus the CDF function
evaluated at that duration value.
Taking the logarithm of each individuals
likelihood and add up all log-likelihood.
We get the overall log-likelihood function,
which will surv as the objective function to be
maximized for the maximum likelihood estimation or MLE.
Notice that the model parameters to be estimated include
both the usual Beta coefficients for
the x variables and
the parameters in the baseline hazard.
In this case, the shape parameter
of Weibull distribution, a.
Next, let's talk about how to interpret
the parameters of Weibull proportional hazard models.
We already know how to interpret the shape parameter a.
Based on whether a is greater than or less than one,
we have positive or negative duration dependence.
The Beta coefficients in
a proportional hazard model
also have direct and clear interpretation.
Because the full hazard in a Weibull model is defined as
this take the logarithm of both sides.
We have this equation.
We can then take the partial derivative
with respect to a particular x variable,
x_ j on both sides of this equation.
On the right hand side, the last term
is the log of the baseline hazard,
which does not involve any x variable.
So it goes away when taking
the derivative with respect to an x variable.
So what we have left is
only the Beta coefficient for x_j.
On the left hand side,
we take the derivative of log of Lambda,
which by the chain rule of derivative is equal
to one over Lambda times the derivative of Lambda.
Notice that the structure here
is the same as what we already
saw in possum regression models for data problems.
This expression represents the percentage change of
Lambda induced by one unit change of x_ j.
Therefore, in Weibull proportional hazard models,
just like in portion regression models.
The Beta coefficients measure how much percent
the hazard will change if
an x variable increases by one unit.
For example, if Beta_j = 0.25,
then it means that if x_ j increases by one unit,
the hazard at any given point of
time will increase by about 25%.
In economics, the percentage change in one variable,
caused by a percentage change in another variable,
is called the elasticity.
Here, we have the percentage change in hazard,
caused by a unit change in x_ j.
So we can call such a value that semi elasticity.
In other words, the Beta
coefficient in Weibull proportional hazard model
measures the semi elasticity
of an x variable on the hazard.
So as we see, the Beta coefficients in
Weibull proportional hazard models have
very clear direct interpretations.
Having explained the development estimation and
interpretation of Weibull proportional hazard models.
I'd like to quickly mention
an alternative way of
specifying and estimating Weibull models.
The intuition and the mathematics involved in
this alternative form are
less straightforward and harder to understand.
Therefore, I don't want to get too much into
it to cause too much distraction and confusion.
Just want to let you know
the existence of this alternative representation.
It's relevant because in
the R package we're going to use,
it actually applies and estimates
the Weibull model according to this alternative form.
So the results need to be transformed back
properly to restore the parameters
as we have just introduced.
That's why I'd still like to
introduce this alternative representation.
Recall that the duration T is a random variable,
and in a Weibull model,
it follows that Weibull distribution with
the hazard function equal to
the proportional hazard as we have specified.
Now, as we can show mathematically,
if we construct this transformation of duration T,
which is still a random variable,
and we can denote it as Epsilon.
Then this random variable Epsilon follows
another known distribution called
the type-1-extreme value distribution.
Utilizing this result, we can reorganize
this equation and write log(t) as
equal to the x Delta combination plus
e. Where Delta is equal to minus Beta over a,
and e is equal to minus Epsilon over a.
In this form, we can view e as a new eta.
Just that its distribution is
no longer the usual normal distribution,
but a variation of the extreme value distribution.
But otherwise, it's still a separate random eta,
just as in a standard linear regression model.
In this sense, we can represent
a Weibull proportional hazard model
in a linear regression form.
In that the dependent variable
becomes log of the duration,
and the independent variables are
still the original x variables.
Following this form, we can
estimate a Weibull model just like
a usual linear regression by regressing
the log of duration on the x variables.
The coefficients we obtain this way would be the Deltas.
They can be transformed to back out
the original Beta coefficients by multiplying -a,
which is the shape parameter,
and it can be estimated based on the error distribution.
This is exactly the output from
the R package we're going to use to
estimate a Weibull survival models.
The estimated coefficients in the output will be Deltas,
and we need to multiply them by
negative a to restore the Beta coefficients.
So be very careful in this regard.
Notice that the Delta coefficients
have direct interpretation as well.
Note that we have the similar structure
here as we had with
the standard representation of
the Weibull model discussed just now.
The difference is that previously,
it was log(lambda) on this site.
Here it is log(T) on this site.
In this sense, the Delta coefficients have
the same semi elasticity interpretation
as the Beta coefficients.
But the difference is that a Delta
coefficient measures the semi elasticity of
an x variable on
the expected duration rather
than on the hazard as for Beta coefficients.
In other words, Delta_j measures how much percent
the expected duration will change
if x_ j increases by one unit.
Notice that the expected duration and
the hazard change in the opposite directions.
If hazard increases, it means the probability for
an individual to "die" at any point of time increases.
As a result, the expected duration
that individual can survive should be shorter.
And vice versa, if hazard decreases,
the probability of dying is lower,
and as a result, the expected duration will be longer.
Such opposite directions are consistent with the sines of
Delta and Beta because a is positive.
So Delta takes the opposite sine as Beta by definition,
which is consistent and makes sense.
The R package we're going to use to perform
survival analysis is the survival package.
We'll use the survreg function
provided in the package to estimate
a Weibull proportional has a model with
the distribution argument specified as Weibull.
As we said, the coefficient estimates reported in
the survreg function output are
the Delta coefficients rather than the Beta coefficients.
To obtain the Beta coefficient values,
we need to manually perform the transformation by
multiplying the Delta
coefficient estimates by negative a.
Notice that the value of
the shape parameter a
also needs to be obtained through transformation.
The survreg function output will
report an estimate of the so called scale,
which is actually the inverse of a.
So we need to take the inverse of
the scale estimate to back out the shape parameter a,
and then use the value of a to transform
the Delta coefficients into the Beta coefficients.
Another special aspect of using
the survreg function is that we need to
first use the surv function to
construct an object as the dependent variable.
As we said, in survival analysis,
the dependent variable consists
of two pieces of information.
One is the observe the time lapse,
the other is the indicator of right censored.
We need to supply both pieces of
information to the surv function to
properly construct the dependent variable
to be used by the survreg function.
One place to pay special attention to
is how the right censoring is indicated.
By the design of the surv function,
zero means an observation is right censored,
and the one means not censored.
This way of coding is often the opposite
to how censoring is usually coded in the data.
So we need to be careful and perform
the appropriate transformation when necessary.
We'll explain how to use
these functions in more detail in the demonstration.
This is all we want to introduce
about Weibull proportional hazard models.
In this video, we introduced and
explained the Weibull distribution,
which is a very flexible and useful distribution family.
We didn't discuss the development, estimation,
and interpretation of Weibull proportional hazard models.
We also introduced an alternative form to
represent and estimate
Weibull proportional hazard models,
and pointed out some important nuances
in using the survival package.
Hope these discussions help give you
a clear idea of how to construct,
estimate, and interpret
a proportional hazard model for survival analysis.
That's all for this video. Thanks for watching.