>> Hello, everyone. Welcome back.
In this video, we're going to
demonstrate how to implement survival models in R.
We will estimate a Weibull proportional hazard model
and then plot that hazard function
and the duration density function to help you
better understand the relationship
between these important concepts.
Let's get started. The dataset
we're going to work on for
this demonstration is the repurchase data.
Suppose an online retailer wants to predict
whether and when past customers will make repurchases.
Based on past sales data,
they organized a dataset that records
the time lapse before
the latest repurchase occurred for each customer.
If a repurchase never happened for a customer,
then the time lapse between the last purchase
and the end of the observation window
is recorded as the duration.
And this customer's record is marked as right censored.
As we see here, the column repurchase records
the time length of the duration before
the repurchases measured in days.
And the column censored
indicates whether a record is right censored or not.
If right censored, it is marked
as one, otherwise as zero.
For each customer, we also
observe many independent variables.
As an illustration here,
we keep the data simple and only
include a few variables here as an example.
For each customer, we record their customer ID,
whether they have been sent a promotional offer,
their income level, and gender.
We like to estimate a survival model
to see how these variables could
affect the expected time duration
before repurchases occur.
Now, let's switch to R to perform the analysis.
To apply survival models in R,
we can use this external package called Survival.
As usual, we need to first download and install
this package using the install.package function.
We'll then use the library function
to load the package into that current R session.
Again, installation needs to be done only once,
but we need to run the library function to load
the package each time we use it in a new R session.
As usual, the data have already
been organized and stored in a CSV file.
Use the read.csv function to read in the data.
Again, be sure to save
the data file under the working directory of RStudio.
Or you need to explicitly specify
the full directory as part of the file name.
Save the imported data into
a DataFrame variable, named Mydata.
To estimate a survival model,
we can use that survreg
function within the survival package.
Notice that the syntax of specifying
the model formula is a bit
different from the usual regression model specification.
Here, we need to first call that
surv function to create a survival object,
which will serve as the
response variable for the survival model.
In the surv function, we need to specify two things.
One is the time duration.
The other is the indicator of data censoring.
For the duration, we simply supply
that repurchase variable because
it records that time duration
before repurchases occur in our data.
For the censoring indicator, pay attention here,
the way it's coded in
the surv function design is special.
Zero means duration is right censored,
and one means the duration
is observed at the full length.
Therefore, the way the censoring indicator is coded by
the surv function is opposite to the usual way.
It is recorded in the data.
In our dataset, the censored variable is set to one if
the duration is right censored and
it is set to zero if it is not censored.
Therefore, we need to use one minus
censored here to reverse the 0,
1 values to fit the coding design of the surv function.
The surv function then creates
the survival object recognizable
by the survreg function,
which will serve as the dependent variable
in the survival model.
The rest of the model specification is the same as usual.
Use tilde as the separator and specify
the list of all independent variables
to be included in the model.
As usual, we can use Tau to represent
all the remaining variables
and use minus sign to mean excluding.
Here, we'd like to exclude the first column,
custom ID, which is not a real variable.
After specifying the model formula,
specify the data as usual,
and then specify the distribution of the duration.
The distribution determines the baseline hazard function
we'd like to use for that proportional hazard model.
Here, we specify the duration as
Weibull to apply that Weibull model.
So these are the arguments we need
to specify for that survreg function.
Run the survreg function and then save the results.
The survival model has been estimated.
We can call the usual summary function
to summarize the estimation results.
As we can see, this is the coefficient table,
where we can see the estimated value
of the coefficient for each x variable,
as well as, for example, the p value,
which indicates the level of
significance for each coefficient.
Notice that, as we explained,
the coefficients from
the survreg function output are not directly
the coefficients in the usual specification
of proportional hazard models.
Instead, we need to perform
some transformations to restore the usual coefficients.
As we explained, instead of directly
reporting the shape parameter
of the Weibull distribution,
a, what the survreg function reports is scale,
which is the inverse of a.
So we need to take the inverse or reciprocal
of scale to restore the original shape parameter a.
Also, all the coefficients for x variables reported by
the survreg function are not the usual Beta coefficients,
but instead the Delta coefficients from this regression,
which is regressing the logarithm of
the duration T on the x variables.
As we explained, the relationship
between Deltas and Betas is that
Delta is equal to
negative Beta divided by the shape parameter A.
Therefore, to restore
the original Beta coefficient values,
we should multiply the coefficient estimate from
the survreg output by -a.
We can do the transformation accordingly in R. First,
extract the estimated scale from
the survreg output and take the inverse,
and this is the shape parameter
of the Weibull distribution, a.
Notice that log scale in the survreg coefficient table
here is simply the logarithm
of scale as we can easily verify.
Then extract the coefficients from that
survreg output using the coef function,
which returns that Delta coefficients.
Then multiply the Delta coefficients by -a,
and what we get will be the original Beta coefficients.
Now, take a look at the Beta coefficient values.
As we explained, the Beta coefficients in
proportional hazard models have
that semi-elasticity interpretation.
So the Beta coefficient for that promotion variable,
for example, means if
a customer receives a promotional offer;
so the promotion variable changes from 0-1,
the hazard rate,
which can be interpreted as
the instantaneous probability density
of repurchase occurring,
will increase by about 17%.
Also, notice the opposite signs of
the Beta coefficients and the Delta coefficients.
As the hazard rate increases,
the expected duration before
a repurchase happens will decrease.
So the Delta coefficient for
promotion is negative accordingly,
which is conceptually coherent.
Having obtained the coefficient estimates
for the proportional hazard model,
the next task we'd like to
perform is to plot the hazard function.
Recall that this is
the hazard function of
a Weibull proportional hazard model,
where this is that baseline Weibull hazard,
and this is the scale function,
which is a function of the x variables.
Therefore, to determine the hazard values,
we need to specify the x variable values.
Again, a natural choice would be
the mean values of the x variables in our data.
To calculate the mean x values, as usual,
we can render colmean function
to calculate the column means of the original DataFrame.
Columns 2, 3,
4 correspond to the three x variables
incorporated in our data.
So calculate the column means of
these three columns and use
the mean values as the x values,
denoted as x bar.
Then calculate the usual x Beta combination,
using the crossprod function to
calculate the cross product of x bar and Beta.
Notice that Beta are
the Beta coefficients we just transformed above.
Also notice that we need to
include an additional one here,
just to correspond to the interceptor coefficient,
Beta 0, included in the Beta coefficient vector.
With the x value determined
and the x Beta value calculated,
we can now plot that hazard function.
It's a function of
time t. There are
many different ways to plot such a function in R. Here,
we show how to use the curve function to plot
a function of a certain
independent variable as a smooth curve.
The syntax of the curve function is very straightforward.
First, specify the functional form
of the function to be plotted.
Notice that there is one requirement here.
The independent variable needs to be specified as x,
so the curve function knows
which one is the independent variable.
According to the hazard function of the Weibull model,
we can specify it accordingly in R. The exponential of
x Beta times a times x^(a-1).
Notice that this x is
actually time t in the original formula,
which is the independent variable of the hazard function.
So it has to be specified as x for the curve function.
Also, notice that here,
we wrap x Beta inside that c function.
This is to eliminate the matrix structure of x
Beta and to turn it into a single value.
Some version of the k function may not be able to
automatically convert a one
by one matrix into a single value,
and it may hence generate some error.
Adding the c function here
can prevent such a problem from happening.
After specifying the hazard function,
we can further specify
the range of the independent variable on
the plot by the xlim argument, say from 0-20.
And the labels for
the x and y-axis by xlab and the ylab as usual.
Execute this statement.
And this is the hazard function of
our Weibull proportional hazard model.
Be sure to understand how to read this plot.
Notice that the shape parameter
of the Weibull distribution, a,
is estimated to be around 0.84,
which is less than one.
So this model has
the so called negative duration dependence.
It means the longer
an individual remains in the current state,
the lower the probability
it will switch into the other state.
Reflect on the plot.
The hazard function is decreasing as time t increases.
At any given point of time,
we can find the corresponding hazard rate from the plot.
For example, when time equals five days,
the hazard rate is about 0.04.
But when time equals 10 days,
the hazard rate decreases to around 0.035.
To be contrasted against the hazard model,
we can further plot the density function of
that duration distribution according
to that same Weibull model.
Recall that the probability
density function of the duration
in that Weibull proportional hazard model
can be derived as this.
To implementing it, however,
we don't have to explicitly specify the density function.
We can simply use the dweibull function,
which automatically computes the PDF
of Weibull distribution for us.
We just need to specify
the two parameters of Weibull distribution;
the shape parameter, which is equal to a,
as we calculated above,
and that scale parameter b,
which is equal to this value
in the Weibull proportional hazard model,
as we can easily transfer.
Again, be sure to denote the independent variable time t
as x here in order for
the curve function to properly recognize it.
Then specify the user argument such as xlab,
ylab, xlim, and ylim.
We can then produce the probability density function
of the duration distribution
according to our Weibull model.
Recall our model has that negative time dependence.
So the hazard rate when time t is small, is very high.
As a result, the probability of
observing short durations is very high.
Because many observations end with short durations,
the probability of observing longer durations is small.
As a result, the density function of
duration distribution can be expected to look like this,
which is decreasing as that duration gets longer.
To help you better understand
the concept of duration density function,
we can plot that histogram
of all the durations observed in
our data and then map
that histogram onto
the plotted duration density function here.
As usual, we can use that hist function to
plot that histogram of the duration in our data set,
which is recorded by this repurchase variable.
Notice that we should plot
only those durations that are not right censored.
Because for those right censored durations,
the observed duration is
not the full length of the true duration.
So their distribution would be distorted.
So we use this condition as
the subsetting index to extract
those observations that are not right censored.
Set the appropriate being size by
specifying the number of
beings using the brakes argument.
Set frequency to FALSE so that
the y-axis or the height of
the bars are not the frequency counts,
but the probability density instead.
This way, the histogram can match
the duration density function in scale.
Setting the add argument to TRUE means
we want to add the histogram onto the current plot.
By default, add is set to FALSE,
so the histogram will be
plotted as a stand alone new figure.
Finally, set color to NULL so that we
don't feel any color into the bars for a neat display.
As we can see, the histogram of observed
durations match pretty well with the density function.
From this exercise, the nature of
duration density function should be very clear to us.
It describes the probability of
observing durations in different lenses,
and that duration density function
can be closely approximated
by the histogram of
the actual durations observed in the data.
These are all we want to demonstrate for survival models.
Hope this example can help you better
understand the key concepts for this topic.
That's all for this video. Thanks for watching.