>> Hello, everyone. Welcome back.
Let's continue our introduction
of non linear econometric models.
We have previously introduced
an important type of limited dependent variable model,
where the outcome is binary.
That is the binary response models,
including the logit and probit models.
In this video, we'll extend
the binary response framework
by adding time information to it.
Instead of the binary response models,
for each individual observation,
we only observe whether the outcome is zero or one.
Now, what if we also observe,
at what time the outcome turned from 0-1?
Incorporating such information into the model can
enable us to predict
when will the outcome of interest occur.
The expected duration for an individual to stay in
a certain state and
the probability of a state change at any point of time.
Survival models will enable us to
incorporate such information and perform this analysis,
as we'll discuss in detail.
In this video, we'll provide
an overview of the survival model setup.
We'll go over the basics of survival models,
including the concept of durations,
survival functions, and hazard functions.
We'll then introduce a commonly applied framework
to specify survival models,
called the proportional hazard model.
Let's get started. As we just mentioned,
survival analysis involves
binary response data plus time information.
For each individual observation data,
the outcome is still binary,
involving two states, which can be
labeled as zero and one or success and failure.
In addition, we also observe
the time lapse before the change of outcome state occurs.
In the typical setting of survival analysis,
all individuals in our observe
the data start with an initial state,
which can be labeled as state zero.
Before the observation window ends,
some individuals exit the initial state
and enter a different state,
which is usually the state of
interest and can be labeled as State 1.
For these individuals, we observe
the exact time lapse between when they
start the initial state and when they
exit the initial state and switch to the other state.
Such time lapses are called durations.
This is why survival analysis is
also referred to as duration analysis.
For those individuals who remained in
the initial state till
the end of the observation time window.
We say these individual observations are right censored,
and we know that their actual durations are longer than
the time lapse observed
till the end of the observation window.
Therefore, the data structure for
survival analysis is a bit more
complex than the standard data structure
we have been working with so far.
In survival analysis, for each individual observation,
we still have the usual
independent variables or x variables.
But the dependent or y variable is different.
It now consists of two pieces of information.
One is whether an individual observation
is right censored or not.
The other is the time lapse
between when an individual entered the initial state and
when that individual either exit
the initial state or got right
censored at the end of the observation window.
As we can see, survival analysis is
commonly applicable in real world contests.
Examples can be easily found.
For instance, survival analysis can be
applied to study what effects
how long patients having a certain disease
can survive after receiving a certain medical treatment.
In that case, we can collect the data
on past patients receiving the treatment.
Each patient entered the initial state
after receiving the treatment,
and we observe that time lapse till
either a patient unfortunately
died later or the observation window ended.
Actually, this is a motivating application of
survival analysis and what
gives its name, the survival analysis.
We can easily find other examples
with a similar underlying structure,
but in very different contexts.
For instance, what affects how long companies
remain in business before
going bankrupt in a certain industry?
Or how long machines can
operate properly before going out of order,
or how long people remain
unemployed before finding another job?
Or how long customers stay with
a company before they leave or turn,
and so on so forth.
With survival analysis, we will
be able to find out what factors
could affect the expected duration
before the stay change occurs.
We're also interested in
another important measure called hazard,
which is the instantaneous probability
of stay changing at any given point of time.
We like to see how hazard changes over time
and is affected by various independent variables.
As we said, the centerpiece of
the dependent variable in
survival analysis is the duration.
Often denoted as T which is the time lapse between when
an individual enters the initial state and
when that individual exits that initial state.
If the observation is not right censored,
then we fully observe the exact duration.
If the observation is right censored,
then we only partially observe the duration.
In that, we do not observe the exact duration,
but just know that the actual duration is longer
than the time laps observed
till the end of the observation window.
Needless to say, duration t
plays a central role in survival analysis.
The specification of a survival model is
essentially specifying the properties of
duration t. Notice that
the duration t is viewed as a random variable,
and each individual's actual duration
is a random realization of
the random variable T. As a random variable,
T follows a certain distribution.
As usual, we can characterize that distribution through
either the cumulative distribution function or
CDF or the probability density function or PDF.
We use F to denote CDF,
and we use f to denote PDF.
As usual, CDF,
F(t) is equal to
the probability of the random variable T,
taking a value less than or equal to a given
time lens t. PDF,
small f(t) is simply
the CDF taken derivative with respect to
t. Be sure to differentiate between the notations
of T and the t. T represents the random variable itself,
and the t represents
a particular realized value
that random variable can take.
A certain time length,
like 10.5 hours or 5.2 days.
With slight abuse of notation,
we may also use t to represent a particular time instant.
If we set the time instant when an individual enter
the initial state as the origin Time 0.
Then time instant t is essentially equivalent to
the time lapse since the origin till that point of time.
Knowing the distribution of
duration t through the cumulative distribution function.
We can define another important function
in survival analysis,
called the survival function.
The survival function s(t) is defined
as the probability of the duration t,
taking a value greater than
a certain given time length t. In other words,
the survival function s(t)
measures the probability of a duration,
lasting or surviving beyond the given value.
By definition, s(t) is simply equal to
1-f(t) because f(t) is
the cumulative distribution function,
which is defined as the probability of
the duration being less than or equal to the given value.
As we can see, the survival function and
the CDF function are essentially equivalent.
Knowing one means knowing the other.
Specifying either function defines
the whole distribution of the duration.
Another very important function in
survival analysis is the so called hazard function.
Formally, the hazard function, length.t,
defines the instantaneous probability
density of an individual
exiting the initial state at
any given time instant t. Conditional on that,
this individual has survived up to that point of time.
Again, as just mentioned,
we set the origin when an individual entered
the initial state as Time 0 so t can
be viewed as either the time instant
at which the individual exited
the initial state or
the time length that individual has survived through.
Mathematically, length of t is
defined as the probability
of the duration t
falling within a small interval between a certain value,
t and t plus
an infinitesimal amount h. Conditional on that,
the duration is greater than the given value
t. Divided by that infinitesimal amount h,
taking the limit of h going to zero.
This definition is actually in
the similar way as how we define probability density.
Intuitively, what the definition means is
that conditional on the duration has
lasted for length t.
The probability for the duration to end between
t and t plus a small amount Delta h is equal to
the hazard Lambda of t times Delta h. Loosely speaking,
you can think of the hazard as measuring
the instantaneous probability of a state change
happening at any given time
instant t. Notice that by definition,
the hazard function is always non negative.
Just like the survival function is
equivalent to that duration distribution functions,
CDF or PDF,
there is also equivalent relationship between
the hazard function and
that duration distribution and the survival functions.
Given the hazard function,
we can derive that CDF and
the PDF of that duration distribution,
as well as the survival function and vice versa.
Defining any one of these functions defines
the whole distribution of
the duration and hence the survival model.
To see such an equivalence,
we can start from the definition of hazard function.
The probability of the duration falling within
the small interval from t to t + h is
equal to.CDF f(t) + h - f(t).
To condition that probability on
the fact that the duration has lasted until t time t,
we divide it by 1 -
f(t) which is the probability
of the duration being greater than t?
We then divided the whole expression by
h and take the limit according to the definition.
As we said, this part is actually
the definition of probability density,
which is captured by.PDF, f(t).
The hazard function,
Lambda of t, can be written as a very simple expression.
The PDF, f(t) divided by one minus the CDF, F(t).
Or alternatively, the PDF,
f(t) divided by the survival function s(t).
This equation already shows the equivalence between
the hazard function and
the duration distribution and the survival functions.
To further see the connection more clearly,
we can further simplify this ratio as this expression.
The log of s(t) taken
the derivative with respect to
t and then take the negative.
This equivalence holds by the chain rule of derivative.
To take the derivative of log of
s(t) we first take the derivative of the log function,
which gives us 1/s(t).
We then take the derivative of s(t) which gives us minus
small f(t) because s(t) is equal to one minus F(t).
Hence, this expression is equal to this expression.
With this equation, we have written
the header function as a transformation
of the survival function.
Reversely, we can then write the survival function as
a transformation of the header function
by first taking the integral of Lambda of t,
and then taking the exponential as this.
As we see, we can write
the survival function in the form of
the header function because s(t) is just 1 - f(t).
The CDF function, F(t )
can also be written in the form of the header function,
as this because the PDF f(t) is just the CDF F(t) taken
derivative with respect to t. We can therefore write
the PDF f(t) also
in the form of the hazard function, as this.
I'm going through these equations
and the mathematical transformation,
just to show you that the header function,
Lambda of t can be transformed into
the CDF and the PDF of the duration distribution,
as well as the survival function.
Knowing what means knowing the others,
and specifying one of
these functions specifies the others,
and hence the full distribution of the duration.
You don't have to memorize these equations,
but just be sure to
understand the equivalence relationship,
which is essential for survival analysis.
Because of the equivalence relationship,
to specify a survival model,
we usually specify that has a function,
Lambda of t. Once Lambda of t is defined,
we can derive the duration distribution accordingly,
and hence the whole survival model is well defined.
The simplest form of the hazard function,
is just a constant,
which does not change with time at all.
That is at any time instant t,
the hazard is always equal to a constant.
This is called a constant hazard model.
Substituting the constant hazard into these equations,
we can derive that PDF and
the CDF of the duration distribution as this,
which are actually the PDF and
CDF of the exponential distribution.
In other words, in a constant hazard model,
the duration follows an exponential distribution.
Another important feature of
a constant hazard model is the memorylessness.
Because the probability of
state change does not depend on time.
Then the history of the process doesn't matter.
No matter how long an individual has survived through,
it doesn't affect the instantaneous probability
of ending the survival state at any time instant.
In general, the hazard function is a function of time.
We need to specify how the hazard changes with time.
We would also like to incorporate
the independent or x variables into the hazard function.
We can find out what x variables would affect
the hazard and in turn affect the expected duration.
A general function that
changes with time and x variables would be too
flexible and the number of ways we can
specify such a function would essentially be infinite.
Therefore, to narrow down our consideration space,
we usually impose some structure to the hazard function.
One particular structure that is
especially convenient to apply and hence
commonly used in survival analysis
is the so called proportional hazard model.
As the name suggests in
a proportional hazard model, the hazard function,
which is a function of both time and
x variables is separated into two parts.
One part is only a function of
time and that does not contain any x variables.
This is called the baseline hazard,
and is often denoted as Lambda 0.
There are many existing families of
functions that we can choose as the baseline hazard,
as we discussed later.
Notice that because the
baseline hazard is a function of time,
the hazard does change with time.
However, because it does not contain any x variables,
the baseline hazard is the
same for all individuals in the data.
Then how do we capture individual heterogeneity?
We will introduce another term in the hazard function
as a coefficient multiplied to the baseline hazard.
This term is a function of x variables,
but does not change with
time because each individual
will have different x variable values.
So this term will have
different values for different individuals.
Because it is a coefficient multiplied to
the baseline hazard to form the full hazard function,
so the full hazard will
be different for different individuals.
Notice that however, because
the baseline hazard is the same for all individuals,
and that the baseline hazard
determines how hazard changes with time,
so the full hazard changes with time in the same way for
all individuals and the only difference
is the multiplicative coefficient in the front,
which would scale the hazard differently.
In other words, the full hazard
will be proportional across
individuals based on the coefficient term
determined by their different x variable values.
This is why the model is called proportional hazard.
Notice that because the hazard function
needs to be non negative,
so the coefficient term,
kepa also needs to be non negative.
Since x variables can take all kind of values,
to ensure Kaplan is always non negative,
we use the same trick and adopt
the usual exponential transformation.
That is to specify Kaplan as
the exponential of the x Beta combination.
Also note that Kaplan is not
a function of time t. However,
some x variables could be time varying.
That is, they may take
different values at different time.
The proportional hazard framework can still
work for time varying x variables.
Just that the calculation will be a bit more complex
in [inaudible] For simplicity,
in all our examples and exercises,
we'll focus on the basic case where
the x variables are all time invariant.
That is their values do not change over time.
As we said, once the hazard function is specified,
the survival model is defined.
If we specify the hazard function
in the proportional hazard form,
we can derive the CDF and
the PDF of that duration distribution accordingly,
by substituting the hazard function into these equations.
With properly selected baseline hazard functional form,
we will be able to derive the CDF and the PDF
in need close form expressions, as we'll show later.
Once the PDF and the CDF
of the duration distribution are derived,
we can write out the likelihood function.
For each individual observation i,
the likelihood of observing the particular length of
duration t_i can be written as this.
If the observation is not right sensored,
t_i is the exact duration length.
The likelihood of duration equal to t_1 is
simply the probability density, the f(t_i).
If the observation is right censored,
then what we can say is that
the actual duration should be longer than t_i.
As a result, the likelihood for the duration to be longer
than t_i is simply 1 - F(t_i).
Note that here, we are using the same way
of expression as we have already seen many times.
DI is the binary indicator for right censoring,
and it is used as the exponent to turn on and
off a particular part of
the expression for different scenarios.
The overall likelihood function is just a product of
the likelihood functions for
all individuals as we have already explained previously,
for easier and faster computation,
we typically use the log likelihood function
instead as the objective function.
When taking the logarithm of the likelihood,
product becomes sum and
exponents become
multiplicative coefficients in the front.
Same as usual, we will use
the maximum likelihood estimation or
MLE to estimate the model parameters.
We will numerically search for the set of
parameter values that will
maximize this objective function.
Notice that the model parameters in
a proportional hazard model include two parts.
The usual Beta coefficients for
the x variables in the Kaplan function,
and the parameters inside
the baseline hazard function denoted as Theta here.
This is an overview of the survival analysis.
We introduced the key concepts of
survival analysis, including that duration,
the CDF and the PDF functions,
describing the duration distribution,
the survival function,
and the very important hazard function.
We also explained the equivalence
relationship among these functions.
So specifying one specifies
the others and defines the survival model.
We then introduced a useful structure
to specify the hazard function.
That is the proportional hazard model.
The hazard function is modeled as the product of
a baseline hazard function and
a multiplicative coefficient term.
That is a function of the x variables.
We didn't discuss how to derive
the likelihood function and
estimate a proportional hazard model.
Hope these discussions give you
a good idea of this important type of analysis.
That's all for this video. Thanks for watching.