>> Hello, everyone. Welcome back.
In this video, we're going to demonstrate how to
apply linear regression in R. Same as usual.
We'll practice all the key concepts
we discussed previously,
such as the R squared,
adjusted R squared, the P statistic,
the P value, and the VIF for colinearity.
We will not only obtain these measures by
calling pre programmed functions in R package,
but also replicate them explicitly through
the defining formulas we have introduced in
previous videos to help you deepen the understanding.
Let's get started. The data set we're going to work
on for this demonstration is
the advertising dataset provided in the ISR textbook.
The dataset consists of the sales of
a particular product in 200 different markets.
Along with the advertising budgets for the product,
in each of those markets,
in three different media,
TV, radio, and newspaper.
The data look like this.
Let's say you are hired as a consultant by the company to
help investigate the association
between advertising and sales.
The company would like to see how much increase in
sales the spending in
a particular advertising media could lead to.
Linear regression can help us answer these questions.
So let's see how to perform it in R. As usual,
the data are stored in a CSV file.
So use the read.CSV function to read in the data.
Be sure to save
the data file under the working directory of std.
Otherwise, you need to explicitly
specify the full directory as part of the file name.
As usual, set header to be true because
our CSV data file does contain header as the first row.
Save the imported data into a variable called,
for example, my data.
Recall that this variable data type will be data frame.
Now, we can call that head function to
display the first 10 rows of the imported data.
As we can see, everything has been properly imported.
Now, we can start working with this dataset.
Because we're going to keep working with
the same dataset for the rest of this demo,
we can first call the attached function
to attach this data frame to the current R session.
Once attached, we do not need to explicitly
specify the dataset again
in many of the R statements below.
Because R now knows which dataset we are working with.
Once we're done with analyzing this dataset,
we can then call the detach function
to detach it from the current R sesion,
as we'll see in the end, like this.
Now we are ready to perform
that linear regression analysis.
We can use the LM function,
which stands for linear model.
Notice that this function is
part of the core R installation.
So you do not need to download and install
any external R package in order to use it.
To use the LM function to run linear regression,
we need to first specify the model.
The syntax works like this.
We first specify
the dependent variable or the y variable.
Here is sales, and
then use the tilda sign as a separator,
after which we specify the list of
the independent variables or the x varables.
We use the plus sign to connect the x variables.
So here, we enter TV plus radio plus
newspaper to include these three variables
as the independent variables for the linear regression.
Notice that if there are
a large number of x variables we'd like to include,
it will be two carbons to
type all variable names one by one.
In that case, we can use the dot sign to represent
all the variables in the dataset other than
those that have already appeared in that model formula.
So we can simply specify model like this,
which is equivalent to the previous specification.
If we want to exclude some variables,
we can then use the minus sign. For example, like this.
What we mean is to include all the variables except TV.
After the model specification,
we designate the data set through the data argument.
Then save the linear regression output to a variable.
Here, lm.res is just a regular variable name,
and the dot sign is just a regular character,
as we explained before.
Let's run this statement.
As we can see, that linear regression
is completed in no time.
As we mentioned previously,
we are able to explicitly derive
the formula to calculate
the linear regression estimators.
So fast computation is
one of the advantages of linear regression.
We can retrieve the linear regression output by
calling the variable that stores the LM function output.
As we can see, we get the estimates of
all the coefficients in front
of the three independent variables,
as well as the intercept.
Recall that the LM function output is returned as a list.
So the data type of this lm.res variable is also a list,
which contains various components.
We can call that names function to
retrieve the names of all of its components.
As we can see, these are the components
that store different parts
of the linear regression output.
For example, we can use
the dollar sign to extract the coefficient component,
which will give us a vector of
all coefficient estimates of the model.
The outputs directly from
the LM function are relatively simple.
We can further call the summary function to
obtain more detailed outputs for our linear regression.
Let's first call the summary function to summarize
the LM output and then save it to a variable.
We then call this variable to
retrieve the summary output.
As we can see, this coefficient table is very
informative and is the main output we're looking for.
The first column shows the estimate of each of
the Beta coefficients in
front of each of the x variables.
The second column shows
the standard error of each Beta estimator.
The third column shows
the P statistic value for each Beta estimator,
and the last column is the P value.
To the right, we see some astrisks.
They indicate the levels of
significance according to different confidence levels.
As they noted here, three astrisks
indicate the particular Beta coefficient
has a p value less than 0.001, which is 0.1%.
So it is significant at 99.9% confidence level.
Two astrisks indicate the particular beta coefficient
has a p value greater than 0.01%,
but less than 1%.
So it is not significant at 99.9% confidence level,
but significant at 99% confidence level.
Similarly, one astrisk indicates that
particular beta coefficient has
a p value greater than 1%,
but less than 5%.
So it is not significant at 99% confidence level,
but significant at 95% confidence level.
And the one thought indicates
the Beta coefficient is not
significant at 95% confidence level,
but significant at 90% confidence level.
And if the Beta coefficient is not
significant at 90% confidence level,
there is no mark next to it.
So after we've run a linear regression,
what we would like to see are these atrisks.
Usually, the more the better,
meaning that we have found some significant effects.
Similarly, lm.sum is also a list and we
can use the names function to
retrieve the names of all of its components.
And then we can use the dollar operator to
retrieve a particular component by name.
For example, lm.sum dollar coefficients,
will give us the table of
estimation results by itself in the form of a matrix.
Then we can use the matrix indices to further
retrieve a particular column as we'll demonstrate later.
Now that we have already completed
the estimation of our linear regression model,
we can do some post estimation analysis.
Let's first calculate the predated value of
the y variable based on our estimated model.
We can easily do so using the fitted function
and pass in the LM function output as the argument.
Save the result into a variable, say y hat.
Let's call y hat and see what is its content.
As we can see, it's a vector containing 200 elements.
These are the predated or fitted y for
each of the 200 observations in our dataset.
Similarly, we can calculate
the residual for each observation.
Recall that, the residual is the difference between
the actual y and the predicated y for each observation.
We can easily obtain it using the resid function.
Again, passing in the linear regression result as
the argument and save the result into a variable u hat.
Now, take a quick look at u hat.
It is also a vector of 200 values,
representing the residues of the 200 observations.
To further demonstrate the concepts
of predicate y and the residuals,
let's co list all x variables,
y variable along with that predated y and the residuals.
We can use that C bind function to
column bind multiple vectors into a matrix.
Let's include all x variables,
TV, radio, and newspaper, and the y variable,
sales, and then the predate y,
y hat, and the residuals u hat,
as we just calculated.
Now, think, what will be
the output of this C bind function?
It will be a matrix.
So with how many rows and how many columns?
Two hundred rows for the 200 observations,
and 1, 2,
3, 4, 5, 6,
six columns for all these variables specified here.
Say we don't want to display all 200 rows,
we can use that row indices one column
10 to select the first 10 rows only to display.
So this is the output.
As we can quickly verify, the last column,
residual u hat should be equal to the fourth column,
the actual y minus the fifth column, the fitted y.
So this is a simple illustration of
the concepts we introduced in previous videos.
Next, let's reproduce the T statistics
to help you better understand the concepts.
Recall that the T statistic is defined as
Beta hat divided by the standard error of Beta hat,
both of which are already available
in the linear regression output summary.
As we just show, you can retrieve all Beta estimates and
the standard errors from
the coefficient matrix in
the summary of the LM function output.
The first column is the coefficient estimates,
and the second column is the standard errors.
Let's retrieve the first column
and the second column respectively.
Then, the T statistic is simply
that Beta estimates divided by the standard errors.
Pay attention here, what are we
doing by this division operator?
We are doing the element wise division.
Both b hat and SE are vectors,
each of which contains four elements,
representing the four Beta coefficients
in the linear regression model.
The division of two vectors
is element by element division.
The result is another vector of four elements,
each of which represents the T statistic of one of
the four Beta coefficients as we can quickly verify.
We can further check that
the t statistics we calculated should be
exactly the same as
the t statistics from
the linear regression output summary.
Let's colist our calculation of the t statistics
and the third column of the coefficient matrix.
As we can see, they are exactly the same.
Now we are ready to reproduce the t test results.
Recall that we can perform
the t test in two different ways.
One is based on the t statistic value
or simply the t value.
The other is based on the p value.
To use t value directly,
we need to first find
the t cutoff based on the confidence level requirement.
Suppose we want to perform the t test
at 95% confidence level,
as we explained in the previous video,
the t cutoff is the 97 point fifth
percentile of the t distribution
with n minus k minus one degrees of freedom.
The degree of freedom can be calculated
explicitly by the number of observations in
the data set minus the number of x variables minus one.
Alternatively, we can simply
retrieve the degree of freedom from
the regression output through the df.residual component.
Follow the regression output with the dollar operator
and then the component name df.residual.
We get the degree of freedom,
which equals 196 as we can verify.
The percentile 97.5 is calculated by first,
deduct 0.95 from one,
and then divide it by two,
and then deduct it from one.
>> Pay attention to the qt function we're using here,
and let me explain in detail.
In R, for each known distribution,
there are a series of
useful functions associated with it.
The q function, the p function,
the t function, and the r function.
The q function is the quantile or percentile function,
which returns the value of
the random variable at a given percentile.
This is like telling the function
a certain percentage among the whole population,
and it will return the corresponding SAT or GRE score.
The p function is
the cumulative distribution function or CDF,
which works in the opposite way.
It returns the probability of
the focal random variable falling below a given value.
This is like giving the function a SAT or GRE score.
The function tells you
what percentage of all scores this score beats.
For t-test, we're going to use the q function to obtain
the t cutoff and use the p function
to get the p-value as we're going to demonstrate.
The t function is
the probability density function or the PDF.
It's the derivative of the p function,
and is what's depicted by
the familiar bell curve of a normal distribution.
Finally, the r function generates
a random value according to the given distribution.
In R, this set of four functions are
named as the first letter q,
p, t, r,
followed by the name of the distribution.
For example, here, qt
means the q function of a t distribution.
And the pt means the p function of a t distribution.
Accordingly, we have the qnorm function or
the pnorm function for
the q or p function of a normal distribution.
Here, we call the qt function,
specifying the percentage and the degree of freedom,
and then we get the t cutoff we're looking for,
for our t-test at 95% confidence level.
Comparing the t value of
each Beta coefficient to this cutoff,
we can draw conclusions on
the statistical significance of each Beta coefficient.
If the absolute value of
the t value is greater than the cutoff,
then the Beta coefficient is
significantly different from zero,
otherwise, it is insignificant.
We can quickly check
the t-test results using this cutoff.
Let's recall the summary of the linear regression output.
As we can see, the absolute value of
the t value for the first three Beta coefficients,
the interceptor Beta 0,
the coefficient in front of TV,
and the coefficient in front of radio are
all greater than this cutoff, 1.97.
So the first three coefficients are all
significant at 95% confidence level,
as indicated by the asterisks here.
In contrast, the absolute value of
the last coefficient in front of newspaper is
less than the cutoff so it is
not significant at 95% confidence level,
and there is no asterisk next to it.
Also, notice that as we mentioned,
a t distribution converts to
a standard normal distribution
as the degree of freedom increases.
We can quickly verify it here.
Let's call that qnorm function
with the same percentage value.
As we can see, the 97.5th percentile of
a standard normal distribution is pretty close to that of
a t distribution with 196 degrees of freedom.
They will get even closer as
the degree of freedom further increases.
We have gone through how to perform the t-test in
R based on t values and the cutoffs.
We next practice how to perform
the t-test based on p-values.
Recall that this is the definition of p-values,
which we have explained in detail in the previous video.
In brief, p-value is the probability for
the t statistic to have
an absolute value greater than the given t value.
Notice that, as we just said,
the pt function is the p function for the t distribution,
which is the cumulative distribution function,
measuring the probability of
a random variable falling below a given value.
Here, the abs function returns the absolute value,
and we use minus
absolute value and the two times to account
for the probability mass at both ends of
the distribution for the two-sided test.
df, again, is the degree of freedom,
and we save the calculated p-values into a variable.
Notice that t stat is a vector of the t values for
all four Beta coefficients so
the calculated p-values are also
returned as a vector of four values.
To verify our calculation result,
we can co-list our calculated p-values
with the p-values from the linear regression output,
which is stored in the fourth column of
the coefficient matrix as we extract here.
As we can see, our calculation gives
exactly the same results as the R function output.
Recall that to perform the t-test based on p-values,
we simply compare the p-values of
each coefficient to 1- the confidence level.
At a 95% confidence level,
we just need to compare the p-value to 0.05.
As we can see, the first three coefficients
have their p-values
much smaller than 0.05 so they are all significant.
Whereas the last coefficient has its p-value greater than
0.05 so it is not significant at 95% confidence level.
The next concept we'd like to practice is the R-squared,
the measure of the quantities of fit of a model.
We can retrieve the R-squared directly
from the summary of the linear regression output.
So use the variable lm.sum
with a dollar sign to
retrieve the component called r.squared.
It stalls the R-squared for
this particular linear regression.
Recall that the R-squared measures
how much of the total variation in
the outcome variable can be explained by
the regression model so it's the higher the better.
Here, we see the R-squared is over 0.89,
which means our linear regression model can explain
about 90% of the variation in
sales in our data set, which is pretty good.
As we explained previously,
we can calculate R-squared by
ourselves using the defining formula.
Recall that the R-squared equals ESS over TSS.
ESS, the explained sum of squares
is the sample variance of the predicted y.
And the TSS,
the total sum of squares is
the sample variance of the actual y.
So we can use the R function to
easily calculate the sample variance of the predictor y,
y-hat and the actual y variable, sales.
And the ratio between the two gives us the R-squared.
As we can see, it's exactly the same as
the R-squared retrieved from
that regression output directly.
Equivalently, the R-squared can
also be derived as 1-RSS/TSS,
and RSS is the sum of squared residues.
So we can simply use the var function to
calculate the sample variance of the residues,
which was stored uhat as we previously obtained.
This will give us the RSS.
And then apply the formula,
we can get the same R-squared value as the previous two.
Next, let's see how we can examine
the potential multicollinearity issues by
calculating the variance inflation factor or the VIF.
There are pre-programed functions that we can
use to calculate the VIF directly.
To use such a function,
we can install an external R package called car.
For the first time, you need to run
install.package to install the package.
As we explained before,
a package only needs to be installed once.
After the first time, you don't need to run
the install.package function again.
However, each time, you always need to run
the library function to
load the package into that current R session.
Once the package is loaded,
we can now run the VIF function
included in the car package to calculate the VIF.
It's very simple. We just need to
pass the linear regression output into
the VIF function and it will calculate
the VIF values for all the x variables in our model.
As we explained in the previous video,
VIF is always greater than what?
But we want it to be as small as possible,
so as close to one as possible.
As we can see here,
the VIF for all the three x variables
are all very close to one,
which indicate there is no multicollinearity issue.
We can also reproduce VIF based on
the concept we introduced in the previous video.
Recall that this is the definition of VIF.
The VIF of a particular x variable
equals 1/1 minus an R-squared value.
But this R-squared value is not
the R-squared of the original linear regression.
Instead, it is the R-squared from
regressing a focal x variable
on all the other x variables.
Back here in R, let's calculate
the VIF for say, TV advertising spending.
So we need to run a separate regression by
regressing TV on all the other two x variables,
radio and the newspaper.
Use the same lm function and the same syntax as
the original regression and
save the output to a new variable.
Then we can retrieve the R-squared of
this regression by calling the summary function
to summarize the regression output and
then extract the R-squared component,
which starts the R-squared that we want.
Finally, apply the defining formula with
this R-squared value and we get
the VIF of the TV variable.
As we can quickly check,
our calculation produces exactly the same result
as the VIF function output.
Having gone over all the key concepts
related to a particular linear regression model.
Next, let's see how to compare
the performance of different regression models.
Recall that the regression results above
shows that the third x variable,
the newspaper advertising spending
does not have significant effect on sales.
In this sense, let's consider
a new regression model that
excludes this x variable from the regression.
And let's then compare the goodness of fit of
this simple model with the original regression model.
To run that new regression,
we follow the same syntax of the lm function.
As explained, we can either
use.-newspaper
to include all the x variables other than newspaper.
Alternatively, we can simply list all the x variables we
want to include and connect them using the plus operator.
So the new regression can be easily performed.
As usual, we can call
that summary function to
summarize that new regression output.
Now, we are ready to compare that model performance of
that new simpler regression and that original regression.
Now, what goodness of fit measure should we use?
Can we use the regular R-squared?
Recall that the regular R-squared will always
increase when we include more x variables in the model.
As a result, it cannot be used
to fairly compare the performance of
models with different numbers of
independent variables because the model
with more x variables will always win.
Instead, we should use
the adjusted R-squared that
penalizes the number of
independent variables in the model.
Just like retrieving the regular R-squared,
we can retrieve the adjusted R-squared through the
adj.r.squared component from the summary
of that regression output.
Let's retrieve that regular
R-squared and the adjusted R-squared of
the simpler regression and
also those of the original regression.
As we can see, If we compare the regular R-squared,
the original regression, which has more x variables,
has a larger value and wins.
But if we compare the adjusted R-squared,
the simpler regression has a larger value and wins.
This confirms the concept that
the adjusted R-squared does
adjust for the number of variables,
and it can therefore be used to compare
the performance across different models.
These are all the analysis we'd like
to demonstrate regarding linear regression.
In the end, don't forget to
detach the data set from the current R session.
Hope these demonstrations give you
more concrete ideas of the concepts we introduced
in the previous videos and help
deepen your understanding of this very important topic.
That's all for this video. Thank you for watching.