>> Hello, everyone. Welcome back.
In this video, I'm going to provide you with
a very quick overview of data analytics,
and discuss some common issues and important trade-offs.
In particular, we're going to talk
about what data analytics is about,
and depending on the goals of our analysis,
how to choose the right model or method by balancing
the important trade-off between
prediction accuracy and model interpretability.
We'll also discuss another important trade-off
between the bias and the variance,
and the important concept of overfitting.
We'll also explain some common categorization in
data analytics that we'll frequently refer to later,
namely, supervised versus unsupervised analysis,
and regression versus classification tasks.
Let's get started. Let's start
with a brief discussion of what data analytics is about,
or what we want to learn from the data.
Generally speaking, we can model
a data analytics task in
an abstract way as specified in this formula.
Here, Y is the output,
usually called the dependent variable,
or outcome variable,
or response variable,
or simply the Y variable.
This is the outcome of interest,
which we'd like to predict or explain.
X can contain multiple variables.
These are the inputs,
usually referred to as independent variables,
or explanatory variables, or
sometimes predictors or features,
or simply the X variables.
These variables are what we believe
could potentially affect the Y variable,
and have observed them in our data.
The last term, Epsilon,
is the so-called error term.
It contains everything that
could affect the dependent variable,
Y, but was not included in the X variables.
Simple as it may appear,
the error term is actually the
trickest in the whole model specification.
As we'll discuss in more detail later in this course,
the error term contains many different components,
such as unmeasurable or intangible variables,
unobservable factors, and pure randomness as well.
Because the error term is not observable to us,
we typically model the error term as
a random variable following a certain distribution.
Finally, f represents a function.
It represents the functional relationship
between the X variables and the Y variable.
It captures the systematic dependence of Y on X,
or the systematic effect of X variables on Y.
How do those X variables affect Y,
and how much does each X variable affect Y?
These are all captured by the f function,
and that is what we're interested in.
Notice that this f function is fixed,
but unknown to us.
It's like the truth of the universe,
but it's just hidden from us.
Our job is to figure it out, but based on what?
Based on the data that we have.
Now, what are our data?
Our data consists of the X variables and the Y variable.
Notice that the error term, Epsilon,
is not part of our data,
because it is the unobservable part.
Our data constitute all the values of the X variables and
the corresponding values of
the Y variable for
a large number of individual observations.
Based on such a dataset,
we need to develop some way to estimate f,
and this is the goal of data analytics.
Simply put, for data analytics,
we'd like to develop a set of approaches or methods
to estimate the f function as closely as possible,
so as to capture the systematic relationship between
the X variables and
the Y variable as accurately as possible.
Notation wise, we use f to represent
the true functional relationship between
the X variables and the Y variable, the hidden truth.
And we use f hat to represent
the estimated functional relationship between X and Y,
based on our data and model.
And the Y hat is
the predicted outcome based on the estimated f function,
given the X variable's values.
This simple formula hence illustrate
the basic idea of data analytics.
To estimate f,
people have developed a lot of different methods.
Now, one question comes,
why do we need so many different methods?
Isn't there a single method
that outperforms all the others,
so we only need to learn and use that one?
The answer is, not really.
It depends on what goals we'd
like to achieve from our analysis.
If our goal is only to predict
the outcome variable as accurately as possible,
we do not really need to care that much
about what exactly the f function looks like.
We can treat the f function as a black box.
As long as our model or method can
accurately predict the Y variable's value,
we can make the f function as complex as needed.
For example, by adding
multiple layers of models on top of each other,
or by aggregating the results from
hundreds or thousands of sub models.
These are all fair games,
as long as we can achieve great prediction accuracy.
However, as a result,
we may lose the understanding of
the structure of the f function,
and the exact relationship
between the X variables and the Y variable.
In some other cases, however,
predicting that Y variable value
may not be the main focus.
But instead, we may want to explain that Y variable.
For example, how Y variable is affected by X variables,
and which X variable has
the greatest impact on the Y variable,
and by how much.
If this is the case,
then the purpose will be what we call
inference or interpretation rather than mere prediction.
In this case, f function can
no longer be treated as a black box.
Instead, we need to look into the f function,
understand what form it takes
and what its structure looks like.
This actually lead to
a very important trade-off for data analytic methods.
That is the trade-off between
prediction accuracy and the model interpretability.
In general, if we want
the model to be more interpretable,
that means the model cannot be too complex,
it needs to have a clear structure,
and clearly indicates the relationship
between X variables and the Y variable.
As a result, the model is
usually more restrictive or limited,
and it will generally have less prediction accuracy.
On the other hand, if we want
a model to have high prediction accuracy,
the model needs to be very
fexible enough to fit the data very well.
As a result, the model typically will be very
complex and it will lose interpretability.
So this is the trade-off between
prediction accuracy and the model interpretability.
Greater prediction accuracy usually
comes with less model interpretability,
and vice versa, higher model interpretability
usually comes with lower prediction accuracy.
This plot summarizes some common data analytic methods
along these two dimensions.
For example, linear regression based on
least square is very simple and very easy to understand.
It has high model interpretability.
But the model is very restrictive as it is
limited to linear relationship between X and Y only.
So very limited model flexibility,
and as a result, low prediction accuracy in general.
In contrast, methods like deep learning,
bagging and the random forests,
their structure is highly flexible,
which leads to high prediction accuracy in general.
However, because they are black box methods,
and the structure is so complex that it is very hard to
interpret the exact relationship
between X variables and the Y variable,
so the model interpretability is low.
This is the very important trade-off between
prediction accuracy and model interpretability.
Based on the goals of our analysis,
we need to pick the most suitable method,
and there is not a single method that
dominates all the others and fits all purposes.
This is why we introduce so many different models and
methods to fit different data analytic needs.
Next, we'd like to discuss
another important trade-off in data analytics.
The trade-off between bias and the variance.
To understand this trade-off,
let's start with prediction errors.
As we know, in data analytics,
we typically would like to
minimize the prediction error between
the predicted outcome from our model
and the actual outcome value observed in the data.
The question is how to minimize the prediction error.
To answer this question, we need to look
at where prediction errors come from,
and what are the sources of prediction errors.
Mathematically, we can
formally derive the prediction error as this.
On the left-hand side, this is
the definition of the expected prediction error.
Here, E means taking the mathematical expectation,
which gives us the expected value.
Y is the actual value of the outcome variable,
and Y hat is the predicted value of
the outcome variable based on our model or method.
And the difference is the prediction error by definition.
We can then substitute in our model.
So Y = f(x) plus Epsilon,
as we just explained,
and the Y hat is equal to f hat of X as defined.
After some derivation, which we'll skip,
we can formally decompose
the prediction error into these three parts,
which we'll explain one-by-one.
Let's first look at the last term.
This is the variance of Epsilon.
Recall that Epsilon is the error term,
which is modeled as a random variable in our model.
So this part represents the part of
the prediction errors that is
caused by the variance of the random error.
This part is called the irreducible error.
Why is it irreducible?
It is irreducible because even
if we were to have the best model in the world,
that can perfectly estimate the true f function,
because of the existence of this random error term,
we would still be unable to perfectly predict
the exact value of Y for each individual observation.
In other words, because of
the existence of the error term,
there will be always some errors
in our prediction of the Y values.
For this reason, the variance of Epsilon
actually represents the lower
bound of our prediction errors.
The minimum possible level of
prediction errors we could ever achieve,
and cannot be further reduced.
This is why this part is called the irreducible error.
Now, the first two terms
combined are called the reducible errors.
They are reducible because they are due
to the imperfection of our model or method,
so that the estimated f function
is still somewhat different from the true function.
And this error can be further
reduced by improving our model or method.
So in this sense, our goal is
to minimize the reducible error,
so as to minimize
the overall prediction errors of our model or method.
Now, let's zoom into
the reducible error and see what's inside.
So the reducible error can be
further decomposed into two parts.
The first part is the variance of
the estimated f hat. So what does that mean?
Notice that given our model method,
the estimated f hat is actually
a function of the data that we used to train the model,
which is what we call the training data set.
So given the same model or method,
using a different training data set will
give us a different estimated f hat.
As a result, the estimated f hat
will vary with the training data set.
That's why we have the variance
of f hat in the first term.
So the first term actually measures how much
f hat would change if
we were to use a different training data set?
It measures how sensitive of our model or
method is to the selection of the training data set.
Now, the second term is the bias of f hat itself.
It means that suppose we were to
have an infinitely large training dataset,
so all the variance in fitting f will be gone,
then how much would
the estimated f hat
still be different from the true f function?
And this is the bias of f hat in the second term.
Notice that such a bias is caused by
the specific form or structure of our model or method.
With the two parts of the reducible error understood,
now comes the bias and variance trade-off.
Generally speaking, if a model is flexible enough,
it will be able to approximate
the true function pretty well,
so the bias will be low.
However, at the same time,
those flexible models tend to
be very sensitive to the training data,
and hence have higher variance.
To better understand this, we need to discuss
another important concept called overfitting,
which you may have already heard of.
Overfitting refers to the fact that
a flexible model is trying
too hard to fit the training data set,
so that it follows the noises too closely,
and starts to pick up the patterns that are
caused by the random noises in the training data,
rather than by the real
systematic relationship within the data.
Because those noises in
the training data are idiosyncratic and
cannot be carried over or
extrapolated into new data observations,
as a result, an overfitted model can
fit the training data very well, in many cases,
even perfectly, but it will perform poorly in
predicting new data observations
outside of the training dataset.
In the language of the bias and variance trade-off,
if a model overfits the data,
it may end up having low bias but high variance,
which may end up in higher prediction errors overall.
That's why overfitting is
a very important issue to keep in mind,
and to avoid when specifying models or algorithms,
especially those that tend to be overly flexible.
As we can see, in some sense,
the bias-variance trade-off is similar to the
accuracy interpretability trade-off we just discussed.
But when we talk about the bias-variance trade-off,
we focus more on how to
optimally specify the form or structure of the model,
given the choice of a particular modeling framework.
For example, given we are going to use linear regression,
how many variables should we include,
or given we are going to use decision trees,
how large a tree should we construct?
Overall, the more flexible we set the model,
the lower the bias,
but the higher the variance,
which may or may not result in
lower overall expected prediction errors.
Therefore, it's not always the case
that the more flexible the model, the better.
Our goal is to find the sweet spot so
that the bias is low, and at the same time,
the variance is not too high either,
so the resulting overall prediction error
can be minimized.
Next, let's quickly discuss
some common categorization in
data analytics as we often refer to.
The first is supervised versus unsupervised analysis.
In the case of supervised analysis,
we have a clearly defined response variable to
predict a specific Y variable of interest.
As a result, we can explore
the relationship between the X variables
and the Y variable.
Actually, most methods we're going to introduce
in this course belong to the supervised category,
including all econometric models in
Part 1 and neural networks in Part 2.
In contrast, in the case of unsupervised analysis,
we do not have such a specific response variable
or Y variable of interest.
That is, we do not have
a clearly defined Y variable to
guide or supervise our analysis.
As a result, what we do is just
exploring the structure or the patterns within the data,
and focus on the relationship among
the X variables or
among the data observations themselves.
Leading examples of unsupervised analysis
include cluster analysis and association detection.
Another categorization we often refer
to is regression versus classification tasks.
For regression tasks, the response variable or
the Y variable is what we
call quantitative or new miracle.
Meaning that their values are numbers.
These numbers can be either continuous,
such as real values with a decimal part,
or discrete values such as integers.
But for classification tasks,
the response variable is what we
call qualitative or categorical,
meaning that their values represent
the membership to a particular category.
The task of classification analysis is to classify
each individual observation into one of these categories.
Notice that what matters here
is the type of the Y variable.
Instead, the types of the X variables
do not affect the nature of the analysis.
Another thing to notice here is that the boundary between
regression and classification can sometimes be blurry.
For example, the logistic analysis can be viewed as
a classification analysis because the goal is to
classify each individual record
into one of the two categories,
either zero or one.
But as we are going to introduce later,
the way we develop
a logistic regression model is based on
the probability of an individual
belonging to a particular category.
Then the probability is a continuous numerical value,
which makes the whole problem fall into
the regression category as well.
That's why we usually refer to it as logistic regression.
So as you can see, the boundary between regression and
the classification can sometimes
be blurry and also clear cut.
These are all we want to talk about in this video.
Just a quick summary. In this video,
we talk about what data analytics is about.
And depending on the goals of our analysis,
we choose different models or methods by balancing
the trade-off between
prediction accuracy and model interpretability.
We also discussed another important trade-off
between bias and variance,
and the important concept of overfitting,
which is something that we need to avoid.
We also explained some common categorization in
data analytics that we'll frequently refer to later.
That's all for this video. Thanks for watching.