>> Hello, everyone. Welcome back.
In this video, we will continue
our discussion of linear regression.
Previously, we have introduced
the basic idea of linear regression and how
to estimate a linear regression model
through ordinary square estimation.
In this video, we will discuss what to
do after estimating the model.
In particular, we're going to talk about how
to interpret the estimated coefficients of
a linear regression and how
to evaluate the performance of
a linear regression model in terms
of how well it fits the data.
We'll introduce some common measures of the
so called goodness-of-fit of a model,
including the R^2 and the adjusted R^2.
Now, let's get started.
To understand the meaning of the Beta coefficients,
let's revisit the defining formula
of a linear regression model.
As an example, let's focus on
the interpretation of one particular Beta coefficient,
say Beta_1, which is
the coefficient in front of a particular x-variable x_1.
The other Beta coefficients can be
interpreted in the same fashion.
Let's say now we increase the value of x_1
by a little bit denoted as Delta x_1.
We can update the right-hand side
of the model specification
like this, updating x_1's value.
We can then expand this term,
which becomes Beta_1*x_1+Beta_1*Delta x_1.
Notice that the entire right-hand side now
determines the new value of the outcome variable.
Whereas Beta_0+Beta_1*x_1 plus all the way through
Beta_k*x_k+u_i is the original value
of y before the change of x_1's value.
Therefore, the difference between these two,
which is the change in
the outcome variables value
caused by the change of x_1's value,
Delta y equals Beta_1*Delta x_1.
If say Delta x_1 = 1,
which means there is one unit change in x_1's value.
Then the resulting change in
the outcome variable simply equals Beta_1.
In other words, Beta_1 simply measures how much change
in y's value will be caused by change in x_1's value.
Formally speaking, Beta_1 measures the change
in y due to one unit change in x_1.
Holding all the other independent variables unchanged.
Notice that the qualification
in the end is very important.
It gives a Beta coefficient,
the so called stars paribus interpretation.
That is holding everything else the same,
change in one independent variable will
lead to how much change in the outcome variable,
which is what's measured by the Beta coefficient.
In this sense, we often say a Beta coefficient measures
the partial effects or
marginal effects of
a particular independent variable
on the outcome variable.
Here, the water partial or marginal refers to
the condition of holding
all the other independent variables unchanged.
You may also often hear this condition being described
as controlling for the other x-variables,
x_2 through x_k, then
the marginal effect of x_1 on y is Beta.
So this is the basic interpretation
of that Beta coefficients.
To help you better understand
the meaning of Beta coefficients further,
I like to quickly point out
another way of expressing the Beta estimates.
Mathematically, we can show that the OLS estimate of
a Beta coefficient in
a linear regression model can be
derived as this expression,
which can be proved to be mathematically equivalent to
the original formula of
the OLS estimate as introduced previously.
In this example here, the focal coefficient is Beta_j,
which correspond to the x-variable x_j.
Notice that r-hat_ij here is the residual from
regressing the full co-x-variable
x_j and all the other x-variables.
And as this formula indicates,
Beta_j can be obtained from regressing
y on this residual r-hat j alone.
Notice that this formula is
not just some mathematical exercise.
Its implication is actually very profound.
It shows us that we can obtain
the OLS estimates through two steps.
First, regress the focal
x-variable on all the other
x-variables and obtain the residual.
Second, regress y on this residual alone,
and the resulting coefficient estimate in front of
this residual equals the OS estimate of
the coefficient infront of the focal x-variable in
the original linear regression model.
Essentially, the residual r-hat j
measures the remaining value of
x_j after the effects of all the
other x-variables have been partialled out or netted out.
And the coefficient Beta_j as a result,
measures the remaining effect of x_j on y
after all the other x-variables effects
have been partialled out.
This is referred to as
the partialling out interpretation
of that Beta coefficients.
This more sophisticated view may not always
be introduced when linear regression is discussed.
But I personally found it very
insightful and hence we
would like to share it with you all.
Hope it can help deepen your understanding
of the meanings of Beta coefficients.
Next, let's talk about how to evaluate the performance
of a model after having estimated the coefficients.
To do so, we'll need some measures of the
so called goodness-of-fit of a model.
That is to measure how well the model fits the data.
The basic idea of
these goodness-of-fit measures is to compare
the outcomes predicted according to
the model to the actual outcomes in the data.
Before introducing the goodness-of-fit measures,
we'll first need to define several important measures.
The first one is called the total sum of squares or TSS.
It is defined by calculating the difference between
each y_i and the average y across all observations,
denoted as y-bar,
and then taking the square and
then adding it up over all observations.
TSS is essentially the sample variance
of y in the data multiplied by n-1.
It measures the total variance of
the outcome variable y in the original data sample.
The second measure is called
the explained sum of squares or ESS.
It is defined by calculating the difference
between the predicated or fitted y,
y-hat i and the average of all y-hat i's,
denoted as y-hat bar,
and then taking the square and
then adding it up over all observations.
Explain the sum of squares is
essentially the sample variance of
the predicted y by the model, multiplied by n-1.
It measures the total variance of
the outcome y according to the model prediction.
It represents the amount of variance in
the outcome variable that can be explained by the model,
which hence gives the name explained sum of squares.
The third measure is called
the residual sum of squares or RSS.
As name indicates, it is the sum of squared residuals,
which is the difference between the actual
y_i and the predated outcome y_t.
Recall that this is
exactly the objective function we
would like to minimize in the OLS estimation.
It represents the amount of
variance in the outcome variable that
is left unexplained after performing the regression.
Notice that the names of
these three measures sometimes can be very confusing.
In some books, the third measure,
the residual sum of squares,
is called the sum of squared error,
hence SSE,
whereas the second measure that explain the sum of
squares is called the sum of squares
due to regression, hence SSR.
Essentially, it pretty much switch
the acronyms of the last two measures.
To avoid the confusion,
it is better to look at
the defining formulas and understanding
the meanings of each definition
then to merely rely on the names.
Now, a very important result to remember.
As we can mathematically prove, in OLS,
the total sum of squares is equal to
the explained sum of
squares plus the residual sum of squares.
We will use this relationship to develop
the goodness-of-fit measure next.
Now, having defined
the three important measures
and knowing the relationship among them,
we can introduce the well known goodness-of-fit measure.
The R^2.
The R^2 is defined as the explained sum of
squares divided by the total sum of squares.
Notice that because ESS+RSS is equal to TSS,
so we can write ESS as TSS-RSS.
The R^2 can be equivalently defined as 1-RSS/TSS.
According to this definition,
the R^2 is the ratio between
the explained sum of
squares and the total sum of squares.
In other words, it measures among
all the variation of the outcome variable in the data,
how much of it can be explained by the model.
Notice that by definition,
the R^2 should be 0-1.
Because it's a ratio, and
both the numerator and the denominator are positive.
The ratio has to be greater than 0.
And the numerator is always less than the denominator.
So the ratio has to be less than 1.
Because the R^2 measures how much of
the total variation in
the data can be explained by the model.
So the larger the R^2 the better,
that is the better model fit.
A large R^2 close to one means the model can
successfully explain almost all variations
in the data, which is very good.
In contrast, a small R^2 close to 0 means
the model can only explain
a very small portion of
the variation observed in the data.
And a large portion is left unexplained,
which apparently indicates the model
doesn't fit the data that well.
One quick note on the name of R^2.
It's called R^2 because as we can prove,
R^2 can be shown to be equal to the square of
the correlation coefficient between y and y-hat as this.
Because the correlation coefficient
is usually denoted as R,
so the goodness-of-fit measure
gets its famous name, the R^2.
Now, think about an important question.
If we add more independent variables
into a linear regression model,
how will that affect the R^2?
The answer is, the R^2 will always
increase when we add
more independent variables into
a linear regression model.
This is because with
more independent variables in the model,
there are more beta coefficients
which are essentially free parameters to optimize.
And as a result, the objective function
of the OLS estimation,
which is that sum of
squared residuals RSS can always be decreased.
The reasoning leading to this conclusion is as follows.
A model with more parameters has
more degrees of freedom to optimize with.
Therefore, we can always achieve
the same optimization outcome by
simply setting the additional three parameters to zero.
But we can certainly further improve beyond that level
by finding the optimal values
for these additional parameters.
As a result, a model
with more independent variables can only
be better off and achieve
a lower level of the sum of squared residues.
Recall that the R^2 is equal to 1-RSS/TSS.
So if RSS can be further reduced,
then the R^2 can be further increased.
Therefore, a model with
more independent variables will
always have a higher R^2 value.
This result is very important and
be sure to remember it. Think about this.
Now that a model with more independent variables,
we'll always have a greater R^2.
Then, is it fair to use the R^2 to compare
the performance of two models with
different numbers of independent variables?
Apparently not.
If we simply use R^2 as
the model performance criterion for comparison,
then a model with more independent variables will
surely outperform the one with fewer variables,
even if those additional independent variables
are not really so relevant.
In this sense, we need to come
up with a better measure that
can account for this issue and
facilitate a fairer model comparison.
This leads to another goodness-of-fit measure,
which is called the adjusted R^2.
The idea of the adjusted R^2 is to
adjust for the number
of independent variables in the model.
We want to penalize
the number of parameters in the model,
so a model with more parameters will receive
a lower adjusted R^2 score
if the model fit performance is the same.
In order for a model with more parameters to
beat a model with fewer parameters in adjusted R^2,
the model with more parameters
needs to outperform in model fit by
a significant amount so as to offset
the penalty imposed due
to the larger number of parameters.
This way, the adjusted R^2 can facilitate
a fair comparison across
models with different numbers of parameters.
Mathematically, the adjusted R^2 is defined as this.
Instead of simply equal to
1-RSS/TSS as in their regular R^2.
Now, we divide RSS by n-k-1 and divide TSS by n-1.
Here, n is the number of data observations,
and k is the number of
independent variables in the model.
And we can see, the larger the k,
the smaller this term.
Hence, the larger this whole term,
and because it's minus here,
so the smaller, the whole adjusted R^2 score.
Same as the regular R^2,
for the adjusted R^2,
it's also the larger the better.
This way, the adjusted R^2 managed to
penalize a model with a larger number of parameters
and can he be used to compare
goodness-of-fit performance across models
with different numbers of independent variables.
Notice that as we said,
the regular R^2 should always be between 0-1.
However, the adjusted R^2 can be below 0.
This is because if the number of
independent variables k in the model is very large,
then this denominator could be small.
If the residual sum of squares,
RSS is not reduced by much accordingly,
then this ratio may end up being greater than this ratio.
As a result, this entire ratio could be larger than
what resulting in the adjusted R^2 being less than 0.
A negative adjusted R^2 indicates
the model's fit performance is really poor.
With lots of irrelevant independent variables,
yet little improvement in fit with the data.
Also, notice that the adjusted R^2
should still be less than 1,
because this term should be positive,
as long as the number of variables
k is less than the number of data observations n,
which is usually the case.
A final quick note.
We can use the adjusted R^2 to
compare models with the same dependent variable,
but different numbers of independent variables.
However, we cannot use
either the regular R^2 or the adjusted R^2
to compare two models with
different functional forms of the dependent variable.
For example, if one models dependent variable is y,
the other models dependent variable is
some function of y such as y^2.
Then the residual sum of squares will
be on different scales across the two models.
And hence, either the regular or
the adjusted R^2 will not be directly comparable.
A quick summary. In this video,
we discussed how to interpret the Beta coefficients in
a linear regression model and how to
evaluate the goodness-of-fit of
a linear regression model.
Namely, we introduced the R^2,
which increases as more independent variables
are added into a model,
and the adjusted R^2,
which penalizes the number of parameters in a model,
and hence can be used to more fairly compare
the performance of models with
different numbers of independent variables.
Hope you find these topics helpful and interesting.
That's all for this video. Thanks for watching.