>> Hello, everyone. Welcome back.
Starting from this video, we're going to
introduce the first part of our topics,
which focus on a series of
econometric and statistical models.
These models are interconnected from
the most common linear regression models to
the more advanced non linear models
of limited dependent variables.
These models are popular and
powerful tools because they have
solid theoretical foundations
and coherent mathematical frameworks.
They are easy to estimate
and have very clear interpretation.
For these reasons, they are widely applied in
business and economic research and analysis.
In this video, we'll start with the
simplest yet the most used model,
a linear regression model.
It is basically the starting point and the foundation of
pretty much all statistical or econometric models.
The beauty of a linear regression model
is its simplicity.
Because of its simplicity,
it can be easily estimated and clearly interpreted,
which makes it a very useful tool,
generally applicable to pretty much any context.
Also because of its simplicity,
linear regression models have been
so well studied that essentially
all of its key theoretical properties
are well understood in great depth,
making it a very helpful tool for us to deepen
our understanding of many key analytic concepts.
Therefore, it is vital to have a correct and in-depth
understanding of this seemingly
simple yet very profound analytic framework.
In fact, one can easily spend
a whole semester to
learn about a linear regression alone.
We obviously don't have that much time.
However, we'll still cover
the most important concepts
related to linear regression in depths,
hoping to well orient to this fascinating domain.
Let's get started. Now,
let's start with the basic setup
of a linear regression model.
I guess most of you are already very familiar with it.
We have a y variable,
which is the outcome of interest.
We typically call it the dependent variable,
the outcome variable, the response variable,
or simply the y variable.
And then we have a set of x variables,
which are the variables that could affect the outcome.
These variables are usually referred
to as the independent variables,
the explanatory variables, the predictors,
or simply the x variables.
Both the x variables and the y variable are our data,
observed for each individual record as
indexed by the subscript i here in the model.
Here, an individual record
could be a consumer, a company,
a product, a regional market,
and so on, depending on the context.
In addition to those variables that could affect
the outcome and are observed
in our data as the x variables,
there are other factors that could affect the outcome,
but not observed in the data.
To capture those factors,
we will also include an error term into the model,
represented by u here.
Although a single symbol,
the error term actually contains
many different components and
is the trickiest element in the whole model.
For example, it can contain those unobservable variables,
variables that will have
an impact on the outcome of interest,
but are not recorded
or captured in the data that we have.
In addition, some factors are
unmeasurable or intangible in nature.
They will affect the outcome of interest,
but can hardly be measured or recorded,
hence are not part of our data either.
These unmeasurable variables also enter the error term.
Another major component of
the error term is pure randomness.
Everything else equal, there could still be
random fluctuation in
the outcome across different observations,
which could also be ascribed to the error term.
Notice that the error term is not part of our data
and is modeled as
a random variable following a certain distribution.
A linear regression model,
models the outcome y as jointly determined by
all the x variables plus
a realization of the random error term.
Each x variable may have
a different level of impact on the outcome,
which is measured by
a coefficient in front of the x variable,
usually denoted as Beta.
These Beta coefficients are
unknown parameters of our model,
and are what we are interested in finding out.
They will need to be estimated from the data.
Both the x variables and the Beta coefficients enter
the function that determines the outcome
y in a so called linear way.
That is, the functional form
only contains terms of degree one,
which are called linear terms.
These terms are further
combined together in an additive way.
This is what makes a linear regression linear.
So this is the basic setup of a linear regression model.
Now, before we move on,
it's worth discussing some of
the key assumptions we make for linear regression models.
They are all related to the error term, which,
as we said, is the trickiest element of the whole model.
As we just explained,
the error term is not observed in all data and
is modeled as a random variable
following a certain distribution.
As a result, given all x variables values,
the y variable is still a random variable,
whose value is determined by
the realization of that random narrative.
Now, what assumptions do we impose on
the distribution of the error term
in linear regression models?
The first assumption is that the expected value of
the error term equals
zero given any values of the x variables.
Notice that here, the mean being
equal to zero is not a critical assumption.
Because we usually include in the model,a so called interceptor,
which is the coefficient Beta_0 by itself as a constant.
So any shift of the mean away
from zero can be captured by the intercept.
Here, the real assumption is that the expected value of
the error term stays the same
regardless of the values of the x variables.
Loosely speaking, you can think of
this assumption as assuming
the error term being
independent of the x variables values.
Now, think about that. Is this assumption reasonable?
Does it always hold?
Let me give you an example.
Suppose we would like to
estimate the return on education.
The y variable is the incomes of different individuals,
and that the key x variable is
the years of education each person received.
The error term u contains
all factors other than
education that could affect the income.
Now, is it reasonable to assume
the error term being independent of the x variable?
Most likely not.
People who receive a lot of education could also be, say,
more intellectually capable or
have more financial or social resources.
All of which could contribute to a higher income level.
In other words, in this context,
it is likely that a higher x variable value
actually indicates a higher value
of the error term u as well,
both of which contribute to a higher value of y.
This would violate the zero conditional mean assumption.
And if we ignore such an issue
and run that simple regression,
we may end up with biased estimation
of that return on education.
This type of issue is called endogeneity in econometrics,
and dealing with it can be tricky and challenging,
which is out of the scope of this course.
The second assumption we impose is that the variance of
that random error term is
constant regardless of the x variables values.
Violation of this assumption is
called heteroskedasticity.
Although the name is long,
the issue is actually easier to
deal with than the endogeneity issue.
So the potential violation of the second assumption
is actually a less severe problem in comparison.
So these are the key assumptions about
the error term imposed in
a standard linear regression model.
I just wanted to point them out at the very beginning,
so you are aware of what are at play
and what are the limits of this type of models.
Now, let's look at
a quick example to give those of you who are not
very familiar with linear regression
a better idea of how it works.
Let's say this is the dataset we have,
the sales of a multinational company
in different markets,
and the advertising spending in
different media in these corresponding markets.
Each row correspond to a particular market,
which can represent a certain region, for example.
The first column is the market ID.
The second column is the sales revenue in each market.
The third, fourth,
and fifth columns are
the advertising spendings in different media,
including TV, radio, newspaper,
respectively, in each market.
We would like to estimate on average,
how much the advertising spending in
different media can boost the sales revenue.
Linear regression can help us achieve this purpose.
In a linear regression model,
we would like to develop here,
the dependent variable or
the y variable will be the sales revenue.
And the independent variables or
the X variables are
the advertising spendings in different media,
including TV, radio, and newspaper.
And all the other factors
not included that could also affect
the sales revenue are modeled as
part of the random error term u here.
In front of each independent variable,
there is a Beta coefficient,
which measures by how much one particular x variable
could affect the y variable.
Notice that we also include
a constant Beta_0 by self as the intercept,
which measures the baseline value of
the y variable when all x variables are zero.
Each observation i correspond to
a particular role in our data set.
So once the model is set up,
we can apply it to our data and
estimate the values of that Beta coefficient.
We'll talk about the estimation method on the next slide.
Once we obtain the estimated values of Beta coefficient,
we then have a measure of
how much advertising spending in
each media could affect sales revenue.
Notation wise, we use
the original Beta to
represent the true value of the coefficient,
which is like the hidden choose that we don't know,
but we would like to find out.
We use Beta hat to represent
the estimated value of
the Beta coefficient based on our data.
Notice that once we
have obtained the estimates of Beta coefficients,
given the value of all x variables for any observation,
we can predict the value of the y variable.
To predict the y value,
we simply substitute in the x variables values
into the model with the estimated Beta coefficients.
And notice that we will omit the error time u here.
The reason we can simply omit
the error term is that we assume
the expected value of the error term
given any x variable values is zero.
An assumption we just explained, remember.
In this sense, the predicted value of y is
the expected value of
the outcome given the x variable values.
Notation wise, we use y hat
to represent the predicted y value.
So in this example here,
for any new observation,
if we know the advertising spending budget
in all of these different media,
we can use our estimated linear regression model to
predict the expected sales revenue
for that particular market.
This is a quick example to show you
the basic idea of a linear regression.
Now, let's discuss how
to estimate a linear regression model.
To estimate a linear regression model,
we would like to find the estimated values of
the unknown Beta coefficients in
the model based on the data we have.
There are different ways to
estimate a linear regression model.
The most commonly used approach is called the
ordinary least square or the OLS estimation.
The idea of ordinary least square estimation is to find
a set of Beta coefficient values that minimizes
the sum of squared distances between
the predicted y values and
the actual y values over all data observations.
This is what gives the estimation method its name,
that is, to find the least square.
This is the mathematical representation
of the idea of OLS estimation.
Recall that for each data observation,
with all the x variables values,
once we know the values of the Beta coefficients,
the predicted y value is simply
the linear combination of x's and Betas,
with the expected value of the error term,
which is zero omitted.
So this part is the predicted y,
that is y hat i.
We compute the difference between
the actual y and the predicted y.
Take the square and add them
up over all observations in our dataset.
This gives us the sum of squared distances.
This is the objective function of our estimation problem.
We would like to find the set of
Beta coefficient values that
will minimize this objective function.
Now let's look at this simple illustration.
Suppose we have one y variable and only one x variable.
Then each observation in the dataset can be
represented as one point in
this two dimensional xy plane.
The linear regression in this case can simply
be represented as a straight line in this space.
That is y hat is equal to Beta_0 plus Beta_1 times x.
Here, Beta_0 determines the intercept,
and Beta_1 determines the slope of that straight line.
What we would like to do is to find
the values of the intercept and the slope,
such that the resulting straight line approximates
the relationship between x and y
among all data points, the most closely.
That is the overall distances between the data points,
and the fitted linear regression line are the smallest.
In other words, we want to find a straight line
that fits our data the best overall.
Let's take a closer look at
various values over this plot.
For each data point, its coordinate
represents the values of the x and the y variables.
This straight line represents
the fitted regression line,
Y hat equals Beta_0 hat plus Beta_1 hat times x,
where Beta_0 hat is the intercept,
and the Beta_1 hat is the slope.
Given a particular data observations x variable value,
the corresponding y value on
the regression line is
the predicted y value for that observation.
That is y hat.
We may also call it the fitted y.
And the difference between the actual y
and the predicted y is called the residual.
Notice that the residues
can be either positive or negative,
depending on whether the predicted y
is greater than the actual y or not.
This is why we would like to take the square of
the residues so that the positive difference and
the negative difference do not
cancel each other out because they
should all be considered as
prediction errors and be accounted for.
We add up the squared residues over
all data observations to obtain
the sum of squared residues,
which is the objective function we'd like to minimize,
which will give us
the estimated Beta_0 hat and the Beta_1 hat.
Now that we understand the goal of the OLS estimation,
the next question is how to obtain
the estimated Beta values so that
they minimize the objective function as discussed.
The beauty of linear regression is its simplicity.
Because the functional structure of
a linear regression is very simple,
the estimated values of the unknown coefficients can
be explicitly derived in close form formulas.
As a result, we do not need to rely on
any numerical method to search
for the optimal values of the coefficients.
Instead, we can directly compute the values of
the coefficients using the derived formulas
and substituting all of our data.
Therefore, the coefficient estimates
can be obtained almost in no time,
even if the dataset is very large in size.
The simplicity and computational efficiency
are the major advantages of linear regression,
and are what make it the most commonly performed
statistical analysis in all kinds of applications.
Now, let me quickly walk you through
the steps of deriving the coefficient estimates.
For those of you who are familiar
with mathematical derivation,
you can follow the steps of derivation closely.
For those of you who are not that familiar, do not worry.
The purpose of me showing
these formulas is simply to show you that
the OLS estimates can be expressed
explicitly in some very concise formulas,
and to show you that how simple it
is to derive these OLS estimates.
As you'll see, it takes only a few steps.
So let's start with the so
called simple linear regression,
which means there is only one x variable.
In simple linear regression,
when there is only one x variable,
the model can be written like this.
An the objective function,
the sum of squared residuals is like this.
We would like to find the values of Beta_0 and
Beta_1 that minimize the objective function.
 
which is an expression that is easier to remember.
This is how the OLS estimates
can be derived for single linear regression.
Again, in which there is only one x variable.
How about the more general case
with multiple x variables?
This is referred to as multiple linear regression.
As you can see, there is
no essential difference between
simple linear regression and
a multiple linear regression.
The reason people often do
the separation is that the derivation of
OLS estimates for multiple linear regression
has to involve matrix expressions.
But the idea and the logic of derivation for
multiple linear regression are the
same as those for simple linear regression.
Now we have multiple x variables
and hence multiple Beta coefficients.
We want to find the set of
Beta coefficients that minimize the objective function.
To do so, like before,
take the first order derivative with
respect to each Beta and set them to zero.
We get a system of equations with
the same number of equations as the number of unknowns,
which again, can be fully solved.
However, to derive the solution
to this system of equations,
we will need to use matrix expressions.
We will not get into the details of
a matrix expressions in this course.
So I'll leave the details
to yourself if you are interested.
The key takeaway here is that with matrix expressions,
as you can see, the derivation of
the Beta estimates is even more concise.
And that the final expression of
the Beta estimates can be viewed as
a generalization of that for simple linear regression.
Again, all it contains are x and y,
which are our data.
So just substituting our data into these expressions,
we can immediately obtain
the estimates of the Beta coefficients,
very simple and fast.
A quick summary. In this video,
we introduced the basic idea of linear regression,
how to construct a linear regression model,
what are the model elements and their meanings,
and what assumptions are involved.
We discussed how to estimate
a linear regression model using
the ordinary least square estimation.
We discussed the objective function of
the OLS estimation and how to
derive the OLS estimates explicitly.
Hope you now have a better understanding
of linear regression,
this most commonly applied statistical
analysis method. Thanks for watching.