>> Hello, everyone. Welcome back.
Let's continue our discussion on linear regression.
Previously, we have talked about
how to estimate a linear regression model and
how to interpret the estimated coefficients
and evaluate the model fit.
In this video, we'll continue along the line
of interpreting the estimated coefficients,
and introduce a concept called hypothesis testing.
We'll focus on one particular type of
test, called the t-test.
Briefly put, the idea of t-test is to
see if the coefficient estimate we obtained based
on the single data set we have at hand reveals
a statistically significant relationship
between the independent variable
and the dependent variable.
To understand the t-test,
we'll start with understanding
the variance of the Beta coefficient estimators,
and then how to estimate
the standard error of the estimators.
We then discuss how to perform the t-test in
detail and how to interpret the test results.
Finally, we'll quickly discuss the issue of
multi-collinearity and one measure
that can be used to detect such an issue.
Let's get started.
To understand the idea of t-test,
we need to first discuss
the variance of the OLS estimators.
As we showed previously,
the estimated value of a Beta coefficient in
a linear regression model is a function of the data.
Given all of the x variables values
and the y variables values in the data set,
we have the formula that can explicitly
determine the values of the Beta coefficient estimators.
In other words, given the data,
the Beta coefficient estimates
are deterministic and are fixed.
So what do we mean by
the variance of the Beta estimators?
And where does the variance come from?
So very importantly,
the variance comes from the fact that
the data set that we have is
a random sample from the general population.
Let's say, for example, the data set we have consists of
10,000 individual consumers with
their income and demographic information.
Although reasonably large in size,
this data set is still
just a sample from the general population of say,
all consumers in a particular market
or a particular region.
And this sample is usually considered to
be randomly drawn from the population.
If we or someone else were to draw another data sample,
it would consist of a different set of
10,000 consumers from the same population.
As a result, even following the same formula,
the Beta coefficient estimators determined
based on this different data sample
would also be different.
In this sense, because
the data sample we obtained is random,
the corresponding Beta coefficient estimators
calculated based on this data sample are also random.
Therefore, we can view the Beta coefficient estimator,
Beta hat, as a random variable.
For random variable, it has its variance, and therefore,
the source of the variance is
the randomness enjoying our data sample.
Mathematically, we can derive
the variance of Beta hat as this.
Here, recall that Sigma^2 is
the variance of the error term
according to our model assumption.
And r hat_ij is the residual
from regressing x_j on
all the other independent variables.
So this term is the sum of
squared residuals or RSS for this particular regression.
Using the defining relationship between
the r^2 and the RSS and the TSS,
we can rewrite the variance of Beta hat as this.
Where this R^2_j is
the R^2 from the same regression as we described here,
that is regressing x_j
on all the other independent variables.
And TSS_j here is the total sum of squares in x_j,
which is the dependent variable in the set regression.
Notice that for a simple linear regression,
because there's only 1x variable,
the set regression above reduces to
regressing the only x variable on the intercept,
which has no variation in the predicted x hat at all.
As a result, the r^2 = 0,
and hence the variance of
Beta hat can be simplified as Sigma^2/TSS.
Knowing the formula of the variance of Beta hat,
how can we calculate its value then?
Notice that we can easily calculate
the residual r hat_ij given
our data by simply running
the set regression as described previously.
What's unknown, however, is Sigma^2.
Which is a theoretical value we
assumed when setting up the linear regression model,
whose true value we do not really know.
Therefore, in order to
compute the value of the variance of Beta hat,
we need to first estimate the value of Sigma^2.
The Gou says that
Sigma^2 can be easily estimated from the data.
Because Sigma^2 is the variance of the arriton,
we can use the residues
from the regression to estimate its value.
Notice that here, the residual
is from the original linear regression.
That is regressing the y variable on all x variables.
We then calculate the sum of squared residues of
the original regression and divide it by m-k-1.
This gives us the estimated value of Sigma^2.
Here, n is the number of data observations,
k is the number of independent variables,
and m-k-1 is called
the degree of freedom adjustment
for the Sigma^2 estimator.
In fact, we don't need to pay too much attention
to the meaning of this degree of freedom adjustment.
In usual cases, the number of
data observations n is very large,
and the number of x variables k is relatively small.
So you can simply think of the estimate of
Sigma^2 as equal to SSR divided by just n,
which is like the ordinary average.
Now we know how to estimate Sigma^2.
So we can substitute it into
the formula of the variance of Beta hat,
and take the square root,
which will give us the standard error
of the Beta estimator,
as this, which is simply by
substitute in the estimate of Sigma^2 here.
The standard error of Beta hat will be
used in the t-test we will discuss next.
Now we are ready to introduce the t test.
The idea of t-t est is to examine
whether or not the Beta estimate
we obtained based on the single dataset
we have indeed represents
statistically significant relationship between
the x variable and the y variable.
Let's say a particular Beta coefficient in or
a linear regression model is
estimated to have the value 2.5,
which is positive and hence appears to
indicate that the x variable has a positive impact on y.
Nonetheless, as we already discussed,
this 2.5 value is
obtained based on the data set we have at hand,
which is just a random sample from the full population.
If we were to draw another data sample,
the Beta coefficient would
have a different estimated value.
As we have shown, the Beta estimate Beta hat has
a variance and its value
varies from data sample to data sample.
It could become much smaller or closer to zero,
or even turn negative and a different data sample.
Then the question comes.
How much should we trust the Beta estimator
we obtained based on the single data sample that we have?
How can we be sure that this estimated value 2.5
does indeed reflect the true relationship
between the x variable and the y variable,
which is significantly positive?
Or it just happen to take
a large positive value under
this particular data sample we happen to have?
While the true effect of x on
y is much smaller or even negative?
Well, the t-test aims to help us answer this question.
Simply put, we would like to compare
the estimated value of Beta to the variance of Beta hat.
To see how large the estimated Beta hat value is
relative to its variance across potential data samples.
Let's say, if the variance of Beta hat is not very large.
Meaning Beta hat does not tend to
vary greatly from data sample to data sample.
Well, the estimated Beta hat obtained from
our data sample is largely positive.
Then we have good reasons to believe that it
does reflect the true relationship between x and y,
which is indeed significantly positive.
On the other hand, say if
the variance of Beta hat is large,
meaning Beta hat tends to
vary greatly from sample to sample,
whereas the estimated Beta hat
we obtained is very close to 0.
It's then hard to conclude that the x variable
really has any significant effect on the y variable.
This is the essential idea of the t-test.
Formally, we will construct the so-called t-statistic,
which is defined as
the estimated Beta hat divided
by the standard error of Beta hat.
Both of them can be calculated based
on our data as we already discussed.
Notice that this statistic is a function of
the data and due
to the randomness enjoying the data sample,
this statistic itself is a random variable.
As a random variable, it
follows a certain probability distribution.
The distribution this t-statistic
follows is called t distribution,
or sometimes called student t distribution,
which interestingly got its name because
the original author used
the pseudo name student when publishing the paper.
The t distribution is set to
have n-k-1 degrees of freedom.
Where again, n is the number of
data observations and k is the number of x variables.
The t distribution may sound
unfamiliar or even mysterious to you.
But you can pretty much think of
it as a standard normal distribution.
It follows the familiar bell curve
of a usual normal distribution and
the shape of the distribution curve
closely approximates that of a normal distribution.
As a matter of fact, as
the t distribution degree of
freedom increases to infinity,
it converts exactly to the standard normal distribution.
Based on the t-statistic,
we can now formally describe the t-test.
T-test is one type of hypothesis testing.
In hypothesis testing, we would like to test whether
a certain hypothesis of interest is
likely to be true or not based on the data we have.
The approach is as follows.
We will first set up a so-called null hypothesis,
which is the opposite of
the interesting hypothesis we'd like to establish,
which is called the alternative hypothesis.
The null hypothesis is like a straw man,
which we'd like to hit and smash.
If based on the results from raw data,
we can conclude that the noun hypothesis
is very unlikely to be true,
then we can establish that
the alternative hypothesis is likely to hold.
This is the basic idea of hypothesis testing.
Now, in t-test for linear regression,
we are usually interested in establishing that
a particular x variable of
interest does have some significant effect,
either positive or negative on the y variable.
In other words, the interesting hypothesis or
the alternative hypothesis we would like to
establish is that the corresponding Beta coefficient,
say Beta_ j is not equal to 0.
Consequently, the null hypothesis
will be just the opposite.
That is, Beta_ j = 0.
Under the null hypothesis, the t statistic,
as we just introduced,
follows a t distribution with n-k-1 degrees of freedom.
As the number of observations n is usually very large,
as we said, the t distribution
converge to the standard normal distribution.
So let's just think of
the t-statistic as following
the standard normal distribution,
which has the mean equal to 0,
and the standard deviation equal to 1,
as we can draw like this.
Now, think about this.
Following such a distribution,
what values is the t-statistic most likely to take?
Should be values around the mean,
which is around the 0.
Now, what is the chance of us
seeing a very large value of the t-statistic?
The chance should be very small.
Therefore, suppose the null hypothesis is true.
That is Beta_ j is indeed equal to 0.
Then the probability of seeing
a very large t statistic is very small.
Now, what if we do obtain a very large t-statistic value?
We can then conclude that most
likely the null hypothesis is not true.
If the null hypothesis is likely to be untrue,
then the alternative hypothesis,
that is Beta_ j is not equal to 0,
is likely to be true.
In other words, we can
conclude that the independent variable x_
j is likely to have a significant effect on y.
This is exactly the idea of the t-test.
>> To perform the t-test more formally,
we need to specify how unlikely is really unlikely.
We need to specify a so called confidence level,
which is a large probability very close to 1 or 100%.
Typical confidence levels are 99%,
95%, or 90% minimum.
Usually won't go below 90%.
Correspond to the given confidence level,
we can find a critical value
or a cutoff of the t-statistic,
which can be denoted as c. If
the t-statistic we obtained has
the absolute value larger than the cutoff c,
then we can reject
the null hypothesis at that given confidence level.
This is the t-test.
Now, let's use a concrete example to illustrate the idea.
Let's say, the confidence level requirement is 95%.
This is the distribution
of the t-statistic, which, as we said,
is very close to the standard normal distribution
with mean 0 and standard deviation 1.
Now, to determine the cutoff of the t-statistic value,
we first calculate 1 minus confidence level,
so 1-95% is 5%.
Now, the cutoff of the t-statistic value is set such that
the probability of the absolute value of
the t-statistic being greater
than this cutoff is only 5%.
Notice that we are comparing
in terms of the absolute value,
so we consider both the positive and the negative ends.
And the test is called a two-sided test.
Now, if the total probability mass is 5%,
that either the positive or
the negative end gets half of the mass.
5%/2 is 2.5%.
The cutoff c should be set such that the probability of
the t-statistic having a value than
c is only 2.5%, like this.
Symmetrically, the probability of the t-statistic having
a negative value less than -c is also 2.5%.
In other words, c is the
97.5th percentile of the t-distribution.
This is how we set the cutoff for
the t-statistic value given
the confidence level required.
Now, these are
the formal descriptions of the calculation.
To help you better understand it
, another quick exercise.
If the confidence level requirement is 99%,
what is the cutoff c?
Similarly, first, 1-99%, which is 1%.
And then 1%/2,
which is equal to 0.5%.
Finally, the cutoff c is the 100-0.5
= 99.5th percentile of the t-distribution.
So the cutoff should be set here.
So the probability of the t-statistic being
greater than this c' should only be 0.5%.
And symmetrically,
the probability of the t-statistic to be
less than -c' should also be only 0.5%.
Is that clear? Now, notice that
as we increase the confidence level requirement
from 95%-99%,
how does the cutoff change?
Yes, the cutoff increases
as the confidence level increases.
If the t-statistic we obtained has
the absolute value greater than the cutoff c,
meaning either t greater than c or t less than
-c. Under the null hypothesis,
the probability of such an event happening is
only say 5% suppose
the confidence level requirement is 95%.
This would be a small
probability event unlikely to happen.
Now that it did happen.
So with 95% confidence,
we can say that the null hypothesis should not hold.
Therefore, we say that we reject the null hypothesis,
which is Beta_j = 0 with 95% confidence.
As a result, we can conclude that
Beta_j is most likely not 0.
Formally, we say that Beta_j is
statistically significantly different from 0,
or simply Beta_j is significant.
This means the corresponding x variable,
x_j has a significant or non-zero effect on y,
and this completes our t-test.
One drawback of performing the t-test,
as we just described,
is that we need to first
fund the cutoff value for the t-statistic,
which is like an extra step.
To make the comparison more straightforward,
we could use the p-value instead.
The p-value and the t-value cutoff
are like the two sides of the same coin.
Both are used to perform
the same t-test following the same logic.
The p-value is defined as
the probability of the t-statistic
to have an absolute value
greater than the current t value we obtained.
Let's say, this is the t-distribution,
and if the t-statistic value we
obtained from our data is this
much and the probability
of the t-statistic being greater than this value,
is say 2%,
then the p-value will be 4%.
Twice this probability measure.
Because again, we are doing that two sided test,
and there is a symmetric half
on the negative end, like this.
As we can see, the benefit of introducing the p-value is
that we can directly compare
it against the confidence level requirement.
If the confidence level is 95%,
then as long as the p-value is less than 5%,
we can reject the null hypothesis with
95% confidence and say that
Beta_j is significantly different from 0.
On the other hand, however,
if the confidence level requirement is 99%,
and the p-value is 0.04,
because the p-value is greater than 1%,
so we cannot reject
the null hypothesis at 99% confidence level.
Again, the underlying logic of
hypothesis testing is exactly the same.
Now, to summarize.
Remember, in order to reject the null hypothesis,
the p-value is the smaller the better,
where as the t-statistic value is the larger the better.
We compare the p-value directly against
1 minus the confidence level requirement.
Whereas we need to compare the t-statistic value
against a cutoff that needs to be predetermined.
This is so much for t-test.
Next, let's quickly discuss one issue that's
also related to the variance
of the coefficient estimator,
called collinearity, or usually multicollinearity.
It refers to the issue when one independent variable is
highly correlated with
one or more other independent variables.
And as a result, the variance
of the coefficient estimator,
Beta-hat, is very large.
To understand the cause of this issue,
we need to go back to the formula
for calculating the variance of Beta-hat.
Recall that the variance
of Beta-hat equals Sigma^2/(TSS_j*1-R_j^2).
As we explained previously,
Sigma^2 is the variance of the eraton in the model.
TSS_j is the total sum of squares in x_j,
and R_j^2 is the R^2 from
regressing x_j on all the other independent variables.
As we already discussed, if possible,
we'd like the variance of
Beta-hat to be as small as possible?
So we can trust
more the estimated coefficients we
obtain based on our data set and
the estimated coefficients can more easily be
statistically significant passing the t-test,
as we just discussed.
Now, think about this.
What factors could affect the variance of Beta-hat?
When will the variance of Beta-hat be large?
And how can we reduce the variance of Beta-hat?
To answer these questions,
we will look at this formula.
The first component is Sigma^2 in the numerate.
A small Sigma^2 could reduce that variance of Beta-hat.
Recall again, Sigma^2 is
the variance of the error term in our regression model.
So it is part of our model and is determined
by the context of our data
and the nature of the problem we're analyzing.
Therefore, given our research question and
our data, Sigma^2 is determined.
If we really wanted to reduce Sigma^2,
we would need to carefully
formulate the research question we aim to study
and carefully collected the data
to collect as many variables as we can.
The goal would be to leave as few factors inside
the error term as possible so as to
reduce the variance of the error term itself.
The next component is TSS_j in the denominator.
To reduce the variance of Beta-hat,
we would want to increase TSS_j.
TSS_j is the total variation in variable x_j in our data.
So given our data,
TSS_j is determined as well.
If we really wanted to increase TSS_j,
when collecting the data,
we should ensure there is as
variation in the values of variable x_j as possible.
The last component is R_j^2 in the denominator.
Notice that to reduce the variance of Beta-hat,
we would want R_j^2 to be small.
Notice here, it is different from our usual goal,
because we usually would want
R^2 to be as large as possible for a better model fit.
But here, we would want R_j^2 to be
small in order for the variance of Beta_j to be small.
Recall again, R_j^2 is
the R^2 from regressing
x_j on all the other independent variables.
A small R_j^2 means
this particular regression has a poor fit,
which means all the other independent variables cannot
explain or predict the focal variable x_j very well.
On the contrary, if x_j can be well
explained by one or several other independent variables,
then R_j^2 will be large.
And as a result, the variance of
Beta-hat will be large as well.
So this leads to
the multicollinearity issue we just mentioned.
If one independent variable in a linear regression is
highly correlated with
one or more other independent variables,
then R_j^2 will be large.
And as a result, the variance of Beta_j will be large.
Consequently, we won't be able to rely on
the estimated value of that Beta coefficient too much,
and the Beta coefficient estimate is most
likely to be statistically insignificant.
Therefore, multicollinearity is an unfavorable issue
we would like to avoid.
Then how to check if there is
any multicollinearity issue in our data.
We can use this measure called
variance inflation factor or VIF.
VIF for a particular independent variable x_j is
defined simply as 1/1-R_j^2.
As we can see, we want VIF to be as small as possible.
Notice that R_j^2 is greater than 0.
So 1-R_j^2 is always less than 1.
And hence, VIF is always greater than 1.
So we want it to be as close to 1 as possible.
A VIF value close to one means
x_j does not have any collinearity issue,
whereas a large VIF value,
say exceeding five or even 10 is a sign of collinearity.
If one independent variable suffers from collinearity,
we can consider removing
this variable from the regression model.
Alternatively, if this variable is critical to include,
we can check what
other independent variables are highly
correlated with this particular variable,
causing the collinearity issue and
remove those variables from the regression, if possible.
The goal here is to reduce the correlation
amongst independent variables themselves
as much as we can.
A quick summary. In this video,
we explained in detail the important concept of t-test.
We started with the variance of
the coefficient estimators and
explained the idea of hypothesis testing,
the t-statistic, the t-distribution,
how to fund the t cutoff
based on the confidence level requirement,
and what the p-value means.
We also discussed the issue of
multicollinearity and the VIF measure to detect it.
These are all very important concepts,
so be sure to understand them clearly.
I hope you find this video helpful, thanks for watching.