Hello, everyone. Welcome back.
We have introduced linear regression
in great detail in the previous videos.
In this video, we'd like to discuss how to handle
qualitative or categorical variables
by introducing the so called dummy variables,
which is an important concept that we
frequently encounter in the late analysis.
Okay, let's get started.
Qualitative variables are also
called categorical variables.
They are to be differentiated
from quantitative variables.
Quantitative variables are also called
numerical variables and are
what we are most familiar with.
Quantitative variables values are just regular numbers,
which can be either continuous or discrete.
Continuous values are simply real valued numbers,
which can have decimal places.
Discrete values are integer numbers
one, two, three, four, five.
In contrast, qualitative variables values
are not numbers,
but are instead membership to different categories.
For example, a qualitative variable
can take four possible values one, two, three, four.
However, here, they do not have
the usual meanings as the integers.
Instead, they indicate
four different categories labeled as one,
two, three, four, for category one,
Category two, Category three, and category four.
If you want, you could
essentially replace these labels with,
say, A, B, C,
D, or anything else.
Here, what matters is the membership to
different categories rather than
the category labels themselves.
Some qualitative variables are so called ordinal,
meaning there is a natural order
among different categories.
For example, different income brackets,
say below 10,000, 10000-50 thousand
50000-100 thousand and above 100,000.
Then there is a natural order
among these different categories.
So they are called ordinal
qualitative or categorical variables.
The other type is called nominal,
meaning there is not
a natural order among different categories.
For example, the color of a car,
which can be white, black, red, blue.
There is no natural order
among these different color categories.
So they are nominal qualitative or categorical variables.
Now, how can qualitative
variables help account
for possible nonlinear relationship?
We need to first understand the difference between
discrete quantitative or numerical variables
and ordinal qualitative or categorical variables.
Let's use a simple example to illustrate the difference.
Suppose we want to study how
consumer spending patterns change with the family size.
Let's say the PX variable of
interest is the number of children in a household,
and the Y variable is
the household's monthly spending on
a certain type of product or service of interest.
The X variable, the number of children,
can be treated as a regular discrete numerical variable
whose possible values are zero,
one, two, three, and so on.
Now think about this. If we include
such a numerical variable in
a linear regression with
a constant beta coefficient in front of it,
then what are we essentially assuming?
We are assuming that the increase in family size
has a constant rate of impact on the household spending.
Let's say if compared to households with no kids,
households with one kid on average will
increase the spending of interest by, say, Delta Y.
Then compared to households with one kid.
Households with two kids on average will
increase the spending of interest by Delta Y as well.
And similarly, compared to households with two kids,
households with three kids on average will increase
the spending of interest by Delta Y as well.
And so on and so forth.
So this is what we refer to as
a linear relationship between the X variable,
the number of kits, and the
Y variable, the household spend.
Now, what if we don't believe
such a linear relationship is likely to hold?
It's possible that households with no kids will have
significantly different spending patterns
from those with kids.
In other words, the change in Y when
X increases 0-1 could be
significantly different from the change in Y when
X further increases 1-2 or two to three.
If this is true, then we say there is
a nonlinear relationship between X and Y.
One simple way to account for
such nonlinear relationship is to treat
the X variable as
a qualitative or categorical variable instead.
We can treat households with no kid
as one category, say category zero,
and household with one kid as end of the category,
say category one, and households with
two or more kids as end category, say category two.
Here, 012 no longer represent the usual numerical values.
Instead, they are the labels of the three categories.
If you want, you could relabel them as category one,
two, three, or A, B,
C, rather than 012.
What we will do then is to introduce
a separate coefficient for each of the three categories,
as we'll discuss in detail next.
This way, we can allow each category to have
separate and independent impact on the outcome variable,
hence relaxing the linear assumption of
a constant slope and
accounting for possible nonlinearity.
Of course, qualitative variables are not
only used to account for possible nonlinearity.
They are essential to estimate
the effects of different categories,
especially those nominal categories.
For example, how different colors of
a car would affect its resale price.
As we'll demonstrate in R later,
qualitative categorical variables can be easily
handled in R using a special data type called a factor.
A factor variable can have different levels,
and each level corresponds to
one possible category of the qualitative variable.
Once a variable is defined as
a factor variable and it
is included in the linear regression,
R will automatically create
a dummy variable for each category,
making handling qualitative variables
pretty easy and straightforward enough,
as we'll see in the R demonstration later.
Now, we are ready to
introduce the idea of dummy variables.
Simply put, we create dummy variables to
represent different categories of a qualitative variable.
Each dummy variable is a binary variable and
only takes two possible values, zero or one.
We create one separate dummy variable for each category,
include it into the linear regression model,
and assign a separate b coefficient in front of it.
Let's start with the simplest case,
qualitative variables with only two categories.
In this case, we only need to create
one dummy variable to
represent one of the two categories.
Let's say category one.
Again, this dummy variable
takes binary values, either zero or one.
For each data observation,
if it belongs to category one,
then we code this dummy variable as one.
If it doesn't belong to category one, that is,
it belongs to the other category,
then we code this dummy variable as zero.
For example, if the qualitative variable
of interest is gender,
then we can create a dummy variable to represent,
say, the female category.
So we code the female as one and the male as zero.
Notice that because we only have two categories,
so one dummy variable will be
enough to represent all possible categories.
Also, we could choose to represent the male category by
the dummy variable instead and
code the dummy variable in the opposite way.
That is, code the male as one and the female as zero.
It will be equivalent,
just that the Beta coefficients interpretation
will be the opposite, as we'll see next.
Once the dummy variable is created and
properly coded for each data observation,
we can include it into the linear regression,
just as a regular independent variable.
As usual, we'll assign
a beta coefficient in front of the dummy variable and
estimate all coefficient values using
the ordinary least square or the OLS estimation.
Now, how to interpret
the values of the Beta coefficients.
In this example, because the D variable xi
is binary and can be only zero or one,
we can interpret the two possible categories separately.
If xi is equal to one,
meaning this particular individual I is female,
then I is equal to Beta
zero plus Beta one plus epsilon I.
Here again, epsilon I is
the ton whose expected value is zero.
So for xi equal to one,
the expected value of YI is Beta zero plus Beta one.
Let's say YI is the income of an individual employee.
The Beta zero plus Beta one hence
represents the average income among all female employees.
Similarly, if xi is equal to zero,
meaning this particular individual employee is male,
then Yi equals Beta plus Epsilon.
Notice that Beta one disappears
here because xi is equal to zero.
Therefore, the expected value of YI is simply Beta zero.
So Beta zero represents
the average income among all male employees.
Now, what's the difference between these two?
It's just Beta one.
So the coefficient Beta one
represents the difference between
the average income of
female employees as compared to that of male employees.
Notice that Beta one is
the key coefficient in front of
the dummy variable we have created.
Therefore, we can conclude that in general,
when there are only two categories,
we can interpret the coefficient of the dummy variable as
the difference between the category refer
and the other category.
That is, compared to the other category,
how much increase in the outcome variable
the category D variable represent will lead to.
Meanwhile, the intercept coefficient
beta zero measures the expected
value of the outcome variable for the other category.
Of course, for a binary D variable,
we do not necessarily have to code it as zero or one.
We can code it differently, for example,
as positive one or negative one.
Accordingly, the interpretation of
the Beta coefficients will change as well.
However, the 01 coding is
the most common way and is what we'll focus on.
I'll leave the alternative coding and
their interpretation to your own exploration.
Next, let's extend to the more general case
of qualitative variables with more than two categories.
In the case of multiple categories,
we will pick one category as the baseline category
and create one separate dummy variable
for each of the other categories.
In other words, if there are N categories in total,
then we will need to create N minus one dummy variables.
Each dummy variable represents
one category while leaving one category as the baseline.
Let's use the example of car colors.
Say the qualitative variable
of interest is the color of a car,
which has three possibilities,
white, black, and red.
To represent such a nominal qualitative variable
in a regression model,
we need to create two D variables. Y two?
Right? Because there are three categories in total.
So N equals three,
and we create N minus one equal to two D variables.
To code these two dummy variables properly,
we first pick one of
the three categories as the baseline category.
We can pick anyone as the baseline,
and it will all be equivalent eventually.
Let's say we pick the red color as the baseline category.
Then the two dummy variables represent
the white and the black colors respectively.
Say the first dummy variable represents the white color.
Then it will be coded as one if a car's color
is white and coded as zero if it is not white.
Notice that X one equal to
zero means this car is not white.
It could be either black or red.
We then use the second dummy variable
to represent the black color.
It will be coded as one if
a car's color is black and
coded as zero if it is not black.
Again, X two equal to zero means the car is not black.
It could be either white or red.
Now, same as before,
we can simply include
these two dummy variables into the regression model,
each with its own Beta coefficient in the front.
And we can estimate the model
using the usual OLS estimation.
Now let's see how to interpret these Beta coefficients.
If a car is white,
how should we code the two dummy variables?
For the first dummy variable X one,
because the car is indeed white,
so X one is equal to one.
For the second dummy variable X two,
because the car is not black,
so X two is equal to zero.
As a result, i is equal to
Beta zero plus Beta one plus Epsilon one.
Beta two disappears here because X two is equal to zero.
Now, if a car is black,
then X one is equal to zero because the car is not
white and X two is equal to
one because the car is indeed black.
As a result, YI is equal to
Beta zero plus Beta two plus Epsilon one.
Beta one disappears here because X one is equal to zero.
Now, what if a car is red?
Then X one is equal to zero because the car is not white,
X two is equal to zero as
well because the car is not black either.
As a result, YI is simply equal
to Beta zero plus epsilon I
as both Beta one and Beta two disappear
because both X one and X two are equal to zero.
Now, let's say the outcome variable Y
is the resale price of a car.
As usual, the ton Epsilon R has an expected value zero.
So the expected price of
a white car is simply Beta zero plus Beta one.
The expected price of a black car is
simply Beta zero plus Beta two,
and the expected price of a red car is just Beta zero.
How to interpret the Beta coefficient step?
The intercept Beta zero measures
the expected or average price of red cars,
which is the category chosen as the baseline.
The coefficient in front of the first dummy variable,
Beta one measures the difference between
the expected or average price of
white cars as compared to that of red cars.
And the coefficient in front of the second Dm variable,
Beta two measures the difference between
the expected or average price of
black cars as compared to that of red cars.
As we can easily conclude,
in general, when there are multiple categories,
we can interpret the coefficient of the D variable as
the difference between the category it
represents and the baseline category.
That is, compared to the baseline category,
how much increase in the expected value of
the outcome variable a particular category will lead to.
Meanwhile, the intercept coefficient,
be zero measures the expected value
of the outcome variable for the baseline category.
All right. These are the basic ideas of
dummy variables for qualitative or categorical variables.
As we can see, the dummy variable approach
essentially allows us to estimate
a separate coefficient for each category
so as to capture
the effect of each category independently.
It is therefore very useful
to account for nonlinear effects
of some variables that can be treated
as ordinary qualitative variables.
And moreover, the dummy variable approach
is essential for
handling the more general case of
nominal qualitative variables as we see.
So be sure to understand this approach well.