>> Hello, everyone. Welcome back.
Let's continue our introduction
of nonlinear econometric models.
We'll continue along the line of
the so called limited dependent variable models and
introduce a particular category of
models where depending on the y variables value,
either the y value or
the entire observation may not be observable.
This leads to the so called
censored and truncated data models.
In particular, we'll explain the difference
between censored data models
and the truncated data models.
Briefly speaking, for censored models,
we observe the x variables for all observations,
whereas the y variables values are
censored at a certain threshold for some observations.
In contrast, for truncated models,
for those observations whose y
variables values are beyond a certain threshold,
we do not observe them at all.
That is, we do not observe both the x variables and
the y variable of those truncated observations at all.
As we will further explain,
that broadly defined censored data models
can be further separated into two subcases,
the so called corner solution response models
and the narrowly defined censored data models.
The difference between these two subcases
lies in whether the true y value of
interest is the corner solution threshold
itself or the latent value beyond the threshold.
Such a difference only affects how
we are going to interpret the partial effects.
Other than that, the same
modeling framework and estimation approach
apply to both cases,
and we can apply the so called Tobit model to both cases.
We'll discuss how it is set up,
what assumptions are involved,
how to estimate the model,
and how to interpret the results.
We'll then introduce the truncated data model,
which is developed to handle truncated data problems,
where some observations are completely missing.
It gives us an example of
how to handle sample selection bias,
which is an important issue to be
aware of when doing data analysis.
As we'll see, because of
the different nature of the data structure,
the way we estimate truncated data models
is different from the way we
estimate censored data models.
Let's get started. As just mentioned, in this video,
we'll continue our introduction of
a series of the so called
limited dependent variable models,
where the dependent variable y
can only take some restrictive values.
In this video, we'll first
introduce censored data models,
where some observations y values are
censored or cut off at a certain threshold.
We'll then introduce another related class
of models for truncated data,
where some observations are not observed at
all if their y values go beyond a certain threshold.
We'll start with censored models.
As just explained, the
broadly defined censored data problems
can be further separated into two subcases,
namely the corner solution response problems
and the narrowly defined censored data problems.
And the Tobit model we're going to
introduce can be applied to both cases.
Let's start with the so called
corner solution response case
first because it's more common and easier to understand.
The other case of censored data
can then be easily understood.
The corner solution response provinces
refer to the case when
the dependent or response variable y values
have a certain lower bound or upper bound.
For those y values that are
greater than the lower bound
or less than the upper bound,
we can observe the exact y values as is,
usually as continuous values.
However, for those y values
that go beyond the lower bound or upper bound,
the y values are censored,
and we can only observe
the corner solution or the threshold value itself.
Examples of this type of
corner solution response data are abundant,
especially related to consumption values.
For example, if we have data recording
each mobile phone users
daily consumption volume of mobile data amount.
As we know, consumption volume cannot be negative.
So there is a natural lower bound
on the consumption amount. That is zero.
If the consumption volume is positive,
we observe the exact positive consumption amount.
However, we will never observe
any negative consumption amount.
Even if that predated consumption volume
based on a linear regression model would be negative.
In those cases, the observed consumption volume
would simply be zero.
That is censored at the lower bound.
These zero daily consumption volumes are
considered as corner solutions because they are
clearly bonded by the economic constraint on
non-negative consumption amount and
are different from those continuous positive values.
Similar examples can be found in
other contexts involving monetary spending,
such as households annual charitable contribution,
which is bonded below at zero as well.
Another example would be percentage shares.
For example, the market share or
wallet share of a certain product among consumers,
which by definition is bounded between 0-1.
Notice that corner solution response problems
need special treatment only
when the corner solution value
accounts for a significant portion in the data.
For example, if in our data,
users rarely have zero consumption volume,
and almost all consumption volumes
observed in the data are positive values,
then we can pretty much ignore
the corner solution response problem and simply treat
those few zero consumption amount as
regular values and fit a usual linear regression model.
It becomes a problem that needs
special treatment only when
those zero values account
for a significant portion in the data.
If so, ignoring the corner solution issue
and continuing to fit
a usual linear regression model
by treating those zeros as
regular values would lead to
biased results, as we'll see.
Also notice that in the corner solution response case,
the corner solutions or
the bound thresholds are meaningful outcome values.
They are the result of
some real economic or practical constraints.
Zero consumption volume means
no consumption on those particular days.
The zero threshold value is what actually matters
rather than some artificial threshold
created in the data collection process.
This is what differentiates
the corner solution response case from
the censored data case as we'll discuss later.
Now, let's take a look at the details of the Tobit model,
which is the most commonly used model to handle
corner solution response and censored data problems.
The model is also one type of the latent variable model,
just like the logit of probe models.
We introduce a latent dependent variable y star,
which is modeled as following
a linear regression relationship
with all independent x variables.
Just as usual, the Betas
are the coefficients for the x variables,
and we also include the intercept Beta
0. u is the usual error term,
which is modeled as a random variable following
a normal distribution with the mean equal to zero,
and the variance equal to Sigma square.
Notice that y star is a latent variable.
So we do not directly observe it in all data.
Instead, we observe the actual y value,
which is determined by y star in this way.
If y star is greater than zero,
which is the lower bound threshold,
then we observe y star's exact value as is.
If y star is less than or equal to the lower bound zero,
then we only observe
the corner solution or the threshold value zero.
We do not observe the exact negative y star value.
This is the model setup of the Tobit model.
What we observe is
the censored y value and
the x variables values for each observation.
And we'd like to estimate
the Beta coefficient values
based on such a model framework.
A few things to note about the Tobit model set up.
First, notice that in the Tobit model setting,
the variance of the error term
Sigma square is assumed to be
an unknown parameter to be estimated from
the data together with all Beta coefficients.
Notice that this is different
from the binary response model setting.
Recall that when we construct the probit model,
the error term u is assumed to
follow a standard normal distribution,
whose variance is simply normalized to one.
Now, think, in the probit model,
why do we have to fix
the variance of the error term to a given value?
Why couldn't we set the variance of
the error term as a free parameter to be estimated,
just like what we are doing here in the Tobit model?
Or in other words, why are we
able to do so here in the Tobit model?
This is because for binary response problems,
the y values are only zeros and ones.
These binary values can
only help us to identify the mean,
which is reflected in the intercept coefficient Beta 0?
We won't be able to identify
the variance based on the binary y values.
However, things are different in the Tobit model.
Here, the y values are no longer binary.
All positive y values are continuous and fully observed,
which provide additional information sufficient
to help us identify the shape of the distribution,
which hence allows us to identify not only the mean,
but also the variance of the error term distribution.
This is an important distinction between
the Tobit model and the binary response model.
Second, in the standard version of the Tobit model here,
we consider the corner solution happens at the lower
bound and have normalized the threshold to zero.
We can easily modify the model
to allow the corner solution to happen at
the upper bound and
all the threshold value to be non zero.
The structure of the likelihood function,
and hence the estimation approach
will stay the same as we'll see next.
By the way, the Tobit model is named after
the American economist
standard statistician, James Tobin.
For those who have finance background,
this is also the same person whom
another commonly used measure in finance,
the Tobin's Q is named after.
Having explained the setup of the Tobit model,
we will next talk about how to estimate it.
Just like logit or probit models,
given the nonlinear model structure,
we won't be able to estimate the model using OLS.
But instead, we'll use
the maximum likelihood estimation or
MLE to estimate the unknown model parameters.
In order to do MLE,
we need to first derive the likelihood function.
That is, we need to specify what is
the likelihood or probability of
observing the y values as in
the data given the corresponding x variable values.
In the Tobit setting, there are two parts of y values.
One part is those positive y values,
because we observe the exact y star values
for these observations.
The likelihood of observing these values is simply
the probability density for the random error term
u to be equal to y-x Beta.
This is because in this case,
y = y star,
and y star is modeled as
the x Beta combination plus the error term u.
Notice that as usual, here,
x Beta is just a shorthand for
the linear combination between
all x variables and
the their corresponding Beta coefficients.
Notice that both y and x values
are all given values in the data.
So the only random variable
involved here is the error term u.
Therefore, given all x values,
the probability of seeing this particular y value
is hence equal to the probability
of the random error term,
taking the value of y-x Beta.
>> Because the error term u is
assumed to follow the normal distribution.
So the probability density for u = y-xBeta is simply
determined by the probability density function
or the PDF of the normal distribution.
Here, the phi denotes
the PDF of the standard normal distribution,
where the mean is zero and the variance is one.
We hence normalize the value y-xBeta by
Sigma to make the transformation
to fit the standard normal distribution PDF.
And this is the likelihood function for
those observations with positive y values.
The second part of observations
have y value equal to zero.
Those y values are the corner solution and do not
equal the exact y star values
according to the Tobit model.
Therefore, the likelihood of observing y = 0 is the
same as the probability of having
y star being less than or equal to zero.
Substituted in y star equal to xBeta+u,
this is equal to the probability of having
the error term u being less than or equal to -xBeta.
Again, because u is
assumed to follow the normal distribution,
the probability of u being less than or equal to
this value can be derived as this.
Here, the Phi is
the cumulative distribution function or
CDF of the standard normal distribution,
again, with mean equal to
zero and the variance equal to one.
Again, we normalize that u value by Sigma to
make the transformation to fit
the standard normal distribution CDF.
The last equality is another transformation due to
the symmetry of
the standard normal distribution around zero.
So this is the likely equal the function for
those observations with the y value equal to zero.
Now, combining these two parts of
observations gives us the overall likelihood function,
which is just the multiplication
of the likelihood for all observations.
Based on whether the y value is positive or zero,
we substitute in different forms of the likelihood,
and the product over
all observations is the overall likelihood function.
As mentioned, we use
the maximum likelihood estimation or
MLE to estimate the model parameters.
As usual, by MLE,
we'll search for the parameter values that will
maximize the overall likelihood function given our data.
Notice that the likelihood function
is highly non linear here.
So there is no close form expression for
the parameter estimates as
a solution to this optimization problem.
Instead, we will need to rely on
numerical search to find
the solution to this optimization problem.
For this reason, non linear models like the Tobit model,
typically takes longer to
estimate as compared to linear regression models,
especially when the data size is large.
Also notice that parameters to be estimated in
a Tobit model include
not only the usual Beta coefficients,
but also the variance of the error term Sigma,
which is identifiable based on
the data as we just explained.
Having explained how to estimate the Tobit model,
we'll next talk about how to
interpret the model estimation results.
As usual, we'd like to evaluate
the partial or marginal effects.
The definition of the partial effects
is the same as usual.
That is, as
a particular independent variable increases by one unit,
how much will it increase or
decrease the expected value of the dependent variable?
What's tricky here is how to
determine the expected value of the dependent variable.
This is also what differentiates
the corner solution response case
from the censored data case.
As I mentioned previously,
in the corner solution response case,
what matters is the observed y values,
including the corner solution threshold,
rather than the latent y star values.
In the example of consumption volumes,
the corner solution zero is also meaningful.
It simply represents zero consumption,
meaning that a user didn't
consume anything in a certain period.
In contrast, the latent y star value,
which should be a negative value accordingly,
is not really meaningful.
It is just an auxiliary variable we created artificially
to facilitate the development of
the model and the estimation approach.
In this sense, when we analyze
the partial effects for
corner solution response problems,
we should evaluate the impacts on the expected value of
the observed y rather than
the expected value of the latent y star.
Notice that it will be
the opposite case for censored data problems,
where the threshold is
just some artificial cutoff
created in that data collection process,
as we'll discuss in details.
So here, let's focus on the
expected value of the observed y.
We can derive it according to the definition.
The expected value of y,
given all x variable values is equal to
the probability of y being greater than
zero times the conditional expectation
of y given y is greater than zero,
plus the probability of y being equal to
zero times the expected value of y,
given y = 0.
Notice that the expected value of y given y
= 0 is simply zero.
So the second term just disappears.
What we have is simply this equation.
That is the expected value of y is equal
to the probability of y being
greater than zero times
the conditional expectation of
y given y is greater than zero.
Notice that all x variables values are given.
So y value is
determined by the random error terms value,
which follows the normal distribution
according to the Tobit model.
Therefore, we can derive both this probability and
this conditional expectation based on
the properties of a normal distribution.
I'll skip the details of
the math and this is the derived result.
Again, the Phi is
the CDF of a standard normal distribution,
and the phi is the PDF of a standard normal distribution.
Now, the partial effect of
a particular x variable is
simply this expected value of y,
taking the partial derivative
with respect to that x variable.
Mathematically, we just take the partial derivative of
this equation with respect to a particular x_j.
Applying the product rule of partial derivative.
The partial derivative of the product of
two functions is equal to the partial derivative of
the first function times the second function itself plus
the partial derivative of the second function
times the first function itself as this.
Substitute in the exact expressions,
and after some combination and reorganization,
we can derive the partial effect
into this neat expression.
Let's put the math aside,
but understand the intuition of this partial effect.
As a particular x variable,
x_j increases, how will it affect the expected value of y?
According to the Tobit model,
given the x values,
the realized the value of y is uncertain,
and it depends on the realized value
of the random error term.
That's why we can only discuss
the impact on y in terms of expectation.
Then how will the change in
one x variable affect the y value in expectation?
As indicated by this equation,
there are two parts of effects.
First, it will affect
the probability of y turning out to be positive.
Second, it will affect
the expected value of y once y turns positive.
These two parts of effects combined
result in the partial effect of x_j on y.
Notice that the second part of
the effect here corresponds to
the usual partial effect
in the standard linear regression setting,
where we don't have the data censoring
or corner solution issues.
The first part of the effect, however,
is the unique aspect due to
the nature of data censoring or corner solution.
It is what complicates the partial effects in
a Tobit model and makes
the partial effect no longer constant.
As we can see from this expression,
recall that the Phi
is the CDF of the standard normal distribution,
so its range is from 0-1.
When xBeta is very large,
y is almost certain to be positive.
As a result, a change in x_j is not likely
to affect the probability of y being positive by much.
So the first part of the effect is almost zero,
and the marginal effect is mainly
determined by the second part of the effect,
which is just equal to
Beta_j as in the usual linear regression.
Therefore, as xBeta goes very large,
the CDF Phi(xBeta/Sigma) converge
to one and the marginal effect converges to Beta_j.
On the other hand, when xBeta is very small,
the probability of y being
greater than zero is very small,
therefore, this term will be almost zero.
So the second part of the effect almost disappears.
Meanwhile, when xBeta is really small,
small change in x_j is
unlikely to bring y to be greater than zero,
so the first part of the effect is almost zero as well.
As a result, the overall partial effect is close to zero.
Therefore, as we can see from this expression,
as xBeta goes very low,
the CDF Phi (xBeta/Sigma) converge to zero,
and the marginal effect converge to zero as well.
Recall that in regular linear regression,
the marginal effects are constant and
simply equal to the Beta coefficients.
However, as we can see here,
in Tobit models,
the marginal effects are no longer constant,
but change with the x variables values.
These are the main concepts we'd
like to discuss for the Tobit model.
Before wrapping up this part,
let me quickly mention
a major limitation of Tobit models.
As we can see from the Tobit model construction,
the expected value of y given y is positive,
is automatically linked to
the probability of y being greater than zero by design.
In other words, if an increase in
one x variable increases
the probability of y being positive,
it will also increase the conditional expectation of
y given y is positive and the vice versa.
However, in some contests in reality,
these two components may
not always change in the same direction.
For example, as people age,
the probability of purchasing
a certain type of life insurance could increase.
However, the amount of money invested into
the life insurance could be decreasing as age increases.
For those scenarios,
the basic Tobit model would be inadequate to account for
the disconnected effects on
the probability of positivity
and the conditional expectation.
To more appropriately model these type of scenarios,
we need to model the two components separately,
which will naturally make the model more complex,
something for those who are
interested to further explore.
Having discussed the corner solution response problems,
let's talk about another closely related type of problem,
the censored data problem.
As already mentioned, the censored data problem is
actually very similar to
the corner solution response problem.
As a result, they are often mixed
together and not clearly distinguished.
>> They may both be referred
to just as the censored data problem.
But here, we still want to make that distinction.
In the hope of not confusing you,
you can think of the censored
data problem we're going to discuss
next as the narrowly defined censored data problem,
and that colloquially refer to censored data problem,
as the broadly defined censored data problem,
which subsumes both the corner solution response problem
and the narrowly defined censored data problem.
Now, what's the difference between
the corner solution response problem
and the censored data problem?
Well, the difference is quite nuanced.
Only in terms of whether it is
observed y or the latent y star,
that is meaningful and of interest.
As we said, in the corner solution response problem,
the corner solution cutoff is due
to real and meaningful constraints.
For example, the consumption or
spending amount cannot be negative.
So the lower bound is zero,
and the zero value observed in the data
is the meaningful consumption or spending amount.
In other words, in the corner solution response problem,
the observed y value is what matters,
and we're interested in
the observed y value rather than the latent y star value,
which in turn is just an auxiliary variable
to facilitate the model development.
In contrast, in the censored data problem,
data censoring is often due to
some artificial design in the data collection process.
For example, we may apply top coding or
bottom coding in data collection by applying
some artificial upper bound or lower bond so that values
greater than the upper bound or less than the lower
bound are not recorded exactly.
For example, incomes greater than
a certain threshold may
simply be recorded as high incomes.
Or networths below zero simply recorded
as negative networths without the exact values.
Notice that we still know that
the value goes beyond the threshold,
but just do not observe
the exact numbers for these out of bound values.
In this case, because the censoring cutoffs
are due to artificial design or in some sense,
the imperfection of the data collection process,
the threshold values are not what's meaningful.
Instead, it's still the unobserved
out of bound exact values that matter.
In other words, in the case of censored data problem,
it is the latent y star rather than
the observed y that matters and it is of interest.
This is the only difference between the two cases.
Other structures of the data remain the same.
What we observe is still
a random sample of the population.
We still observe all x variables for all observations,
including the censored observations.
And for y values within the bounds,
we still observe the exact values.
Given the similar data structure,
we can apply the same Tobit model
to the censored data problem.
Here is a generalized version of the Tobit model,
with both the upper bound and the lower bound involved.
Same as before, the late the y star is
determined by a set of x
variables in a linear regression structure,
and we observe the exact y star
if it falls between the lower bound and the upper bound.
If y star is greater than the upper bound c_1,
we only observe y as being equal to the upper bound c_1.
If y star is less than the lower bound c_2,
we only observe y as being equal to the lower bound c_2.
We can derive the likelihood function
in the same fashion as
previously in the estimated model
using the same MLE approach.
What's different is only the interpretation
of the partial effects.
Because in the censored data case,
what matters is the latent y star.
It actually makes things simpler.
We only need to focus on how change in
an x variable will affect the expected value of y star.
Because y star follows
a linear regression structure with
the eratons expected value equal to zero.
So the expected value of y star given
x is simply the x Beta combination.
Taking partial derivative of the expected value of
y star with respect to
a particular independent variable x_j,
the partial effect is simply Beta j,
the same as in a regular linear regression model.
In other words, for censored the data problems,
the partial effect of
an x variable on the expected value of
the outcome of interest
simply equals the Beta coefficient,
which is much simpler than the partial effect
we derived for the corner solution response case.
These are the two cases involving data censoring.
One is due to meaningful corner solution restriction,
the other is due to the imperfection in data collection.
We can apply the same Tobit model framework to
both cases and estimate the model in the same way.
The only difference is interpreting the partial effects.
Next, let's look at another type of
problem with a similar and oftentimes confusing name,
but actually a very different nature,
that is the truncated data problem.
Colloquially, truncated data problems are
sometimes confused with censored data problems,
and it may be referred to interchangeably.
But actually, as you'll see,
the two types of problems are
quite different in the data structure,
and we need to apply different models
with different estimation approach.
So a clear distinction here is very necessary.
Simply put, in truncated data problems,
if the dependent variable value goes
beyond a certain threshold for some observations,
we do not observe the observations at all,
including both the y value and all x variable values.
This is fundamentally different from
censored data we just talked about.
In censored data,
we still observe all observations.
For those observations whose y value
goes beyond the threshold,
we still observe all x variables values.
We also partially observe the y value in that
we know the fact that
the y value is beyond the threshold.
In this sense, for censored data,
we still have a random sample from the population.
However, for truncated data,
we no longer have a random sample from the population.
The observations are selected into
the sample based on the dependent variables values.
Therefore, if we do not
correct for the sample selection issue,
the estimation results will surely be biased.
Data truncation is often caused by
intentional or unintentional sample selection
in the data collection process.
For example, we may want to study
the return of a certain type of
educational experience on
the wage people can earn afterwards.
However, if our sample only includes
those individuals who have found
a job and reported their wage,
and then we have omitted those individuals who have
not found a job with effectively non positive wages.
To account for such a sample selection issue,
we need to apply the truncated data model.
The basic model framework is very similar to
the Tobit model with the dependent variable y,
following a linear regression structure
over a series of independent x variables.
As usual, u is the eraton,
which is modeled as a random variable,
following the normal distribution,
with mean zero and the variance Sigma square.
Due to data truncation,
those observations with the y values greater than
a certain threshold c are not observable at all.
Notice that here, we apply the
upper bound only as an illustration.
We can easily adjust the model to apply
either the upper bound or the lower bound or both.
To correct for the sample selection bias,
we need to adjust the way we formulate the likelihood.
Recall that without data truncation,
the likelihood of observing
a record with a particular y value,
is just the probability density of
the eraton u being equal to y minus x Beta,
which equals f(y) minus x Beta,
where f is the probability density function
or PDF of the normal distribution,
the eraton u follows.
Nonetheless, with data truncation,
we need to take into consideration
that the reason we can observe
this observation is because y is below
the threshold c. Therefore,
the true likelihood should be
adjusted as the conditional probability density,
conditional on the fact that y is less than or equal
to threshold c. Mathematically,
we should normalize the probability density by
the probability of the eraton u
being less than or equal to c minus x Beta,
which is measured by
the cumulative distribution function
or CDF of the normal distribution,
f(c) minus x Beta.
With such an adjusted likelihood of function,
we can estimate the model through
the usual maximum likelihood estimation or MLE,
again, by numerically searching for
the parameter values that will
maximize the overall likelihood function.
With the truncated data model estimated,
interpreting it is actually pretty straightforward.
As usual, we are interested in the partial effect on
the expected value of the outcome
when a certain x variable changes slightly.
Here, the expected value of y is
simply equal to the linear combination of x and Beta.
Therefore, taking partial derivative
with respect to a particular x variable,
what we get is just its Beta coefficient.
In this sense, the partial effects in
truncated data models are just
like those in linear regression models,
which simply equal that Beta coefficients.
These are what we want to discuss
about truncated data models.
Be sure to understand
the differences from the censored data models.
To apply censored and truncated data models in R,
we can use existing external package to easily do so.
The censReg package help us
to easily estimate Tobit models,
as we'll demonstrate in the demo example.
To apply truncated data regression,
we can use the truncreg package,
which I'll leave it to your own exploration.
To quickly sum up.
In this video, we discussed
three closely related yet essentially different types
of problems namely;
the corner solution response problem,
the censored data problem,
and the truncated data problem.
We introduced how to use the Tobit model to address
both the corner solution response
and the censored data problems.
We also explained how to use
the truncated data model to
handle truncated data scenarios.
Be sure to understand
the nuanced differences and
the connections between these models.
Hope this video helps you well understand
this broader category of
limited dependent variable models.
That's all for this video. Thanks for watching.