>> Hello everyone. Welcome back.
In this video, we are going to demonstrate how to perform
censored regression in R.
We'll work with simulated censor data,
where some observations dependent on
variables values are censored to zero explicitly.
We'll show how basic linear regression,
ignoring the data censoring issue
would lead to biased estimation,
and how censored regression or
the Tobit model can
successfully restore the two parameter values.
We'll then analyze how
the marginal effects change
with x values in Tobit models.
Many important concepts for this topic will
become a lot clearer after this demonstration.
Now, let's get started.
We will use the censReg package
to perform censored regression.
As usual, whenever we need
to use an external packa in R,
we need to first download and install
the package using the install.package function.
Notice that we will need to include
the package name in a pair of double quotes.
Once the package is downloaded and installed,
we need to load it into
the current R session using the library function.
Notice that with the library function,
we will enter the package name directly
and do not need to use the double quotes.
Each package only needs to
be installed once on a computer,
but needs to be reloaded
every time the R session is restarted.
Therefore, we just need to render
installed.package function only once
for each new package.
But need to render library function every
time we want to use the package in a new R session.
Next, we'll simulate the data for this demonstration.
The benefits of simulating data
for this demonstration are two fold.
First, it can help you better understand
the exact data generating process for censored data.
Second, by simulating our own data,
we know that two parameter values,
and I can clearly see if our estimation approach
can successfully restore the two parameter values or not.
To simulate the data,
let's keep it simple and only consider
one independent variable or one x variable.
Let's simply call it x.
We'll simulate 100 data points or observations.
Each data point has an x value drawn from
a uniform distribution ranging from 2-6.
Here, we use the R unif function
to randomly draw values from a uniform distribution.
The first argument specifies
the number of values we'd like to draw.
The next two arguments specify
the range of that uniform distribution from 2-6.
We can use the sort function
to sort all simulated x values from small to large.
We can take a quick look at the simulated x values.
Then we simulate the dependent variable values
or the y values for each observation.
Following the data generating process
laid out in the Tobit models.
We will first simulate the latent y or ystar,
which follows a linear regression structure.
Ystar is determined by a linear combination
of the x variables plus an error term.
Because we only have one x variable here.
There are just two Beta coefficients.
The interceptor coefficient, Beta 0,
which is set to -4,
and the coefficient in front of the x variable,
Beta 1, which is set to one.
The error term is assumed to
follow a standard normal distribution.
Here, we use the rnorm function
to draw random values
from a standard normal distribution.
We draw 100 random values for
that 100 observations we are simulating.
Let's take a quick look at the simulated ystar values.
Having generated the latent ystar values.
We can now determine
the observed y values based on the Tobit model setup.
Recall that in Tobit models,
the observed y equals the latent ystar,
if ystar is greater than zero.
If the latent ystar is less than or equal to zero,
the observed y is zero.
To generate the observed y values in this way,
we can first let y = ystar,
and then set the y values of
those observations where ystar is less than 0-0.
Then the variable y stores all the y values for
the 100 simulated observations as we can quickly check.
Notice how the y values
correspond to the latent ystar values.
All negative ystar values turned into zero y values,
and all positive y statr values
remain the same for y values.
Now we have simulated
all the data we need for this analysis.
We can quickly plot all data points on a scatter plot.
As we can see, for many data points,
y values are clearly censored at zero.
And for those observations with positive y values,
y and x follow a positive correlation in general.
Before we proceeded to the analysis, just to clarify,
this data simulation part is only
needed for this demonstration example.
In your homework exercises,
you are provided with a real dataset.
So you do not need to simulate any data at all.
You just perform the analysis based on
the dataset provided to you in the homework.
Next, let's first run a basic linear regression,
ignoring the data censoring problem and just
treating the observed zeros as regular y values.
Let's see how the estimated coefficients will be biased.
Call the L M function to regress y
on x as usual and save the output,
and then summarize the results.
As we can see, the estimated Beta 0 and Beta
1 are quite off from
the two parameter values we used in the simulation,
which are -4, and one.
We can plot the fitted
regression line on the scatter plot.
Here, the predated function calculates
the predated y for each of the observations,
and the line function simply
connects all points using a smooth line.
Line type equals two means we use a dashed line.
As we can see, this is
the fitted regression line
from a basic linear regression,
ignoring the data censoring problem.
Now, let's compare with
the true line which we used to simulate the data.
That is with the intercept equal to -4,
and the slope equal to one.
We can use the AB line function to plot such as
straight line with a given interceptor value
and a given slope.
As we can see, the linear regression line
is less steep than the true line.
In other words, the basic linear regression,
ignoring the data censoring problem
would underestimate the slope of x.
Now, think why.
This is because a basic linear regression simply
treats the observed zeros as regular y values,
and I would then conclude that
as x values further decrease,
there will be little decrease in the y value,
because y will still be equal to zero.
As a result, the effect of x will
be under estimated by a basic linear regression.
Now let's estimate a Tobit model
and properly account for the data censoring problem.
We can use the censReg function included
in the censReg package to estimate a Tobit model.
With the censReg function,
we don't need to specify anything special.
We just need to specify the dependent variable and
the independent variables in
the usual way as we specify a regular model.
That is y, Tilda, x.
If there are multiple x variables,
we use plus signs to connect them. That's it.
Save the result, and we can use
the same summary function to
show a summary of the estimation results.
As we can see, the estimated intercept Beta
0 is close to
that two parameter value used for simulation,
which is -4,
and the estimated slope,
Beta 1 is also close to the two parameter value one.
We can extract the estimated coefficients using
the coef function and take the first two values.
Notice that the last coefficient is
about the variance of the aton in the Tobit model,
denoted as Sigma square,
and the Sigma is hence the standard deviation.
But pay close attention here.
The value here is the logarithm of Sigma.
To restore the original Sigma value,
we need to compute the exponential of this log Sigma.
As we do here, extract the third element from
the coef function and calculate the exponential of it.
This is the standard deviation of the error term.
Recall that in simulating the data,
we use the standard normal distribution
as the distribution of the error term.
A standard normal distribution has mean
zero and a standard deviation equal to one.
So the two Sigma value is one,
and the estimated Sigma value is close to it.
So overall, as we show,
the Tobit regression can
properly recover the two parameter values.
We can further plot the string line
fitted based on the Tobit estimation results.
First calculate the linear combination of x and Beta,
then plot them using the lines function.
Of course, you can also use
the AB line function here if you prefer.
As we can see, the fitted line from Tobit regression is
much closer to the t line
as compared to the linear regression line.
As we explain, in corner solution models,
what matters is the observed y.
The marginal effect of x is measured as
its impact on the expected value of observed y.
Now, let's further probe
how the marginal effect of x changes nonlinearly in
a Tobit model to help you better
understand how to interpret and make sense of this model.
Let's first at the expected value of the observed y.
As we introduced, the expected value of
y in a Tobit model can be derived as this.
Here, capital site is
the cumulative distribution function
or CDF of a standard normal distribution,
and little site is
the probability density function
or PDF of a standard normal distribution.
X Beta is the usual linear combination of x and Betas.
So we can specify this expression in R using
pnorm for the CDF of a standard normal distribution,
and the dnorm for
the PDF of a standard normal distribution.
Xb is what we calculated previously,
and the Sigma is transformed from that estimation result.
Now, plot the expected value of
observed y as a function of x.
As we can see, it clearly follows a nonlinear pattern.
As x becomes very small.
The latent ystar is most likely to be below zero.
The observed y is most likely to be zero.
As a result, the expected value
of observed y is very close to zero.
On the other hand, when x is large,
the latent y str is
moly positive and the far away from zero.
The observed y is mot surely
to be uncensored and just equal to ystar.
As a result, the expected value of observed it will
converge to the expected value of the latent ystar,
which is represented by this string line.
Having understood the meaning of
expected y and how it changes with x.
The marginal effect of x is simply taking
the derivative of expected y with respect to x.
In other words, the marginal effect of x is determined
by the slope of the curve of the expected y.
As we introduced, the marginal effect of
x in a Tobit model can be derived as this.
Again, capital site is
the CDF of a standard normal distribution,
and Beta j is
the coefficient in front of the focal x variable.
We can write out this expression in R similarly and
plot the curve of marginal effect as a function of x.
As we see, the marginal effect follows a S curve.
When x is very small,
ystar is almost surely negative,
and hence the observed y is almost surely zero.
Therefore, although an increase in
x will cause ystar to increase,
it is not likely to increase the value of the observe
the y because the observed y will still be zero.
Therefore, the marginal effect of x on
the expected observed y value,
in this case, is very close to zero.
On the other hand, when x becomes very large,
censoring is unlikely to happen,
and the observed y is almost surely
positive and equal to the latent ystar.
As a result, the marginal effect
of x on the expected value of
y is almost the same
as the marginal effect of x on ystar,
which is measured by the value of Beta 1.
Overall, as x increases,
its marginal effect also
increases as a result of two effects combined.
On one hand, as x increases,
the probability of the observed y
turns positive from zero increases.
On the other hand, as x increases,
the expected value of y,
conditional on its positive also increases.
The two effects combined lead to an accelerating rate of
change in the expected value of y as x increases.
As we see, Tobit models are able to well capture
that very nature of
the marginal effect as x value change.
In contrast, the basic
linear regression won't be able to do so.
If we plot the marginal effect
based on the linear regression model,
which is simply the estimated Beta one coefficient.
It's clear that the marginal effect
is constant and simply equal to
the average of the changing marginal effect values
derived from the Tobit model,
just as a course overall approximation.
Just to clarify, the above analysis
and the plotting of the expected y values and
the marginal effects are meant to help you better
understand the concepts surrounding
the censored data models.
You don't really need to plot
these curves for the homework exercises.
In the homework, you are asked
to calculate the marginal effect
when evaluated at a certain set of x variable values.
You can easily do so by using the MGF function,
included in the censReg package.
To use this function, first,
pass in the Tobit regression result.
Then specify the values of x variables
at which the marginal effects are going to be evaluated.
Specify these values as
a vector in the corresponding order.
But don't forget to include one as the first value here,
just to represent the intercept in the model.
For example, if we evaluate
the marginal effect at x equal to 2.5,
it's close to zero,
as we have previously analyzed.
If we evaluate the marginal effect at a larger x value,
say x equal to six,
it's close to the two Beta one value, which is one.
Again, consistent with our previous analysis.
These are all we want to
demonstrate for the censored data model.
Hope this example based on the simulated data can help
you better understand the key concepts
of this type of models.
It will also help you work on the homework exercises.
Okay, that's all for this video. Thanks for watching.