>> Hello, everyone. Welcome back.
We have so far introduced
many different types of econometric models to
handle different types of problems with
different data structures of the dependent variables.
In this last topic of the first part of this course,
we'll return to the starting point
and revisit the linear regression model.
We'll zero in on a crucial assumption
of linear regression model,
and discuss, what if this assumption does not hold?
Which is actually very common in practical applications.
This leads to a very important issue called endogeneity.
With the presence of endogeneity,
basic linear regression will lead to
biased estimation of the coefficients,
making any causal interpretation inappropriate.
In this video, we will go over
the causes and the symptoms of endogeneity,
and introduce possible treatments. Let's get started.
We will describe the issue of endogeneity and
explain its causes both intuitively and formally,
based on which you should be
able to tell how endogeneity will
bias the coefficient estimates and
lead to incorrect causal interpretations.
Let's go back to where we started
and revisit that basic linear regression model.
In a linear regression model,
the dependent variable y is modeled as equal to
a linear combination of
a series of independent x variables,
plus an unobserved random error term.
A critical assumption for
a standard linear regression model is
that the expected value of the error term,
given any values of the x variables,
is always equal to zero.
As we explained when introducing
linear regression models,
the centerpiece of this assumption is that
the expected value of the error term is independent of,
or uncorrelated with the x variables.
In other words, when some x
variable's value increases or decreases,
it does not affect the expected value of the error term.
As a result, the expected value of y is simply
equal to the x Beta combination so
a Beta coefficient measures
the partial or marginal effect of
the x variable on the expected value of y.
That is how much the expected value of y will
change if that x variable increases by one unit,
holding everything else unchanged?
This is what we refer to as the causal interpretation,
because it has the so
called ceteris paribus interpretation,
holding everything else equal.
If only a particular x
variable's value changes a little bit,
how much will the outcome of
interest be expected to change?
We can then say such a change in the outcome is
caused by the change in that x variable's value.
In this sense, the Beta coefficients
have causal interpretations,
which is clearly very meaningful and valuable in
revealing the underlying mechanism
that could affect the outcome of interest.
Now think, what if
this critical assumption does not hold?
In other words, what if the error term is
correlated with one or more x variables?
Let's say the error term is now correlated with x_1.
Then if x_1 increases,
the expected value of the error term will also increase,
both of which will affect the value of the outcome y.
As a result, the Beta coefficient, Beta 1,
will no longer be able to measure
the correct partial effect of x_1,
because we will no longer have
a clean ceteris paribus setting.
When x_1 changes, now,
something else inside that error term will also change,
violating the qualification of
holding everything else unchanged.
We call the violation of
this critical assumption, the endogeneity issue,
and call the x variable or
variables that are correlated with the error term,
the endogenous variables,
as opposed to exogenous variables,
where are those x variables that
are uncorrelated with the error term.
As we'll show, when endogeneity is present,
applying basic linear regression while
ignoring the endogeneity issue will cause
the Beta coefficient estimates to be different from
their true values and to
lose their correct causal interpretation.
In this case, we say that
coefficient estimates are biased.
Unfortunately, endogeneity is an issue way too common in
real-world contexts so it's a major challenge
for causal analysis based on most observational data.
There are different sources of endogeneity,
such as measurement errors and simultaneous equations,
but we'll focus on the most common source of endogeneity.
That is the omitted variables,
as we'll explain in detail next.
Omitted variables, as the name suggests,
are those variables that we do not observe in the data,
but can affect the outcome of interest.
By definition, omitted variables will enter
the error term and become
part of it in the regression analysis.
Omitted variables are
the most common cause of endogeneity issues.
To see this, let's consider an example.
Suppose we'd like to analyze the return on education,
and we'd like to see how more years of
education would affect
the expected wage a person can earn.
As an illustration, let's keep the model simple,
and only focus on one focal variable here,
the years of education.
Let's say we collected data
of a large sample of individuals,
including the years of education
they received and the wage they earned,
so our simplified model has wage as
the dependent variable and
education as the independent variable.
As usual, we have Beta 1 as the coefficient of education,
and Beta 0 as the intercept.
Our key interest is the value of Beta 1,
which supposedly, measures
the marginal effect of education on the expected wage.
That is the return on education.
Now, let's say we have
another hidden factor that
will also affect the wage a person can earn.
That is an individual's innate ability.
However, as we know, it is very hard to
quantify or measure a person's ability.
Not to mention to precisely
observe and record it in the data.
As a result, we do not
observe this ability variable in our data.
In this sense, ability
becomes an omitted variable for our analysis.
And by definition, it enters the error term,
which as we introduced previously,
contains everything that could affect outcome y,
but was not included in the observed x variables.
Let's use v to denote the new error term,
that includes both the unobserved variable ability
and the original error term u.
Notice that having some unobserved variables
per se is not a problem,
because they can simply be included in the error term,
and this is what the error term is designed for.
What would be a problem is that if
this omitted variable is correlated with the x variable,
which is highly likely to be the case here.
As we can think of, education is,
to a large extent, a choice variable.
Different individuals choose to receive
different lens of education
based on their own situations.
People having, say a higher ability level,
may choose to receive more years of education,
perhaps because pursuing advanced degrees
does not appear too harder to them.
Alternatively, the opposite may also be true.
People having a higher ability level may find a lot of
opportunities to advance their career
and say, make a fortune.
So they may find less incentive
to stay in school for long,
because that would incur too much opportunity cost.
In either case, the omitted variable, ability,
is likely to be correlated with
the focal x variable, education.
For easier reference and discussion,
let's simply assume the first case,
albeit not necessarily true,
but let's just assume that education
is positively correlated with ability.
That is, individuals with a higher ability level are
more likely to receive longer education and vice versa.
And let's also assume both higher ability and
more education can help
increase the expected wage a person can earn.
In this case, since
the error term v contains the omitted variable,
ability, and ability is
correlated with the focal x variable, education.
Even if we assume all the other factors included in
the original error term u
are uncorrelated with education,
the new error term v
will still be correlated with education.
Therefore, the assumption that the error term is
uncorrelated with x variables is violated,
and that we run into the problem of endogeneity,
and the key x variable education is now endogenous,
no longer an exogenous variable.
Let's first intuitively think about
the consequences of such an endogeneity issue,
and how it will bias
the estimated effect of education on wage.
Now, because of the presence of the endogeneity,
individuals with more years of
education are likely to earn higher wages,
not only because of the effects of education per se,
but also because of
the potentially higher ability levels
associated with the higher education levels.
However, if we don't correct for
that and simply run regular linear regression,
ignoring such an endogeneity issue,
we would attribute the higher wages
entirely to the effects of education.
As a result, the effects of education on
wage will be over estimated.
This is exactly the impact of endogeneity,
and why it has to be properly accounted for.
Next, let's formally analyze how
endogeneity will bias the Beta coefficient estimate,
using the same example of regressing wage on education.
Recall that the standard OLS estimator
of Beta 1 is equal to the covariance
between the x variable and the y variable
divided by the variance of the x variable.
The x variable in this example is education,
and the y variable is wage.
Substituting y equal to Beta
0 plus Beta 1 times x plus the error term v,
and expand the calculation of covariance.
We can write this covariance as equal to
the covariance between x and Beta 0, which is 0,
since Beta 0 is a constant and does not vary,
plus the covariance between x and the Beta 1 * x,
which is equal to Beta 1 times the variance of x itself,
plus the covariance between x and
the v divided by the variance of x.
We can then derive the OLS estimate
of Beta 1 as equal to the true value of Beta
1 plus the covariance between
the focal x variable and
the error term v divided by the variance of x.
In the standard linear regression setting,
the key assumption is that
the error term is uncorrelated with the x variable.
So the covariance between x and v is zero.
Therefore, the OLS estimator of Beta
1 is equal to the true value of Beta 1.
So the OLS estimator is unbiased.
However, when endogeneity is present,
the error term will be correlated with the x variable.
So the covariance between x and
the v will no longer be 0.
As a result, the basic OLS estimator,
ignoring endogeneity, will no
longer be equal to the true value of Beta 1.
So the OLS estimator will be biased.
Depending on how the error term is
correlated with the endogenous x variable,
we can determine the direction of the bias.
In our example, the error term v
contains the omitted variable ability,
and the ability is expected
to be positively correlated with wage.
So v is equal to Beta 2 times ability plus u,
where Beta 2 measures the ability's impact on wage,
and is hence positive.
We can then expand
this covariance in the same way as previously.
The first part is the covariance between
education and Beta 2 times ability,
which leads to this expression.
The second part is the covariance
between education and u.
Notice that the u is the error term after excluding
the omitted variable that causes the endogeneity.
So u is supposed to be
uncorrelated with the x variable, education.
Therefore, the covariance between education and u is 0.
So the last part disappears.
Therefore, the OLS estimate of Beta 1 can be written as
the true value of Beta 1 + Beta 2 times this ratio.
>> Notice that this ratio has
the same structure as what we saw here.
Which means it is equal to the coefficient
from regressing ability on education.
We can denote it as Delta 1.
Again, Delta 1 is the coefficient in front of education.
If we run a separate regression where
the omitted variable ability becomes the y variable,
and the endogenous variable education
serves as the x variable.
Now, as we can see,
the OLS Simta of Beta 1 is equal to
the true value of Beta 1 plus Beta 2 times Delta 1.
The bias is measured by
the product of Beta 2 and the Delta 1.
And the direction of the bias is hence jointly
determined by the size of Beta 2 and Delta 1.
Again, Beta 2 measures the impact of
the omitted variable ability on the y variable wage,
which is supposed to be positive.
And Delta 1 is the coefficient of
education from regressing ability on education,
where it measures the correlation
between education and ability.
By our assumption, education
is positively correlated with ability.
So Delta 1 should be positive.
As a result, the product of Beta
2 and the Delta 1 should be positive.
So the bias is positive.
In other words, the OLS estimator of Beta 1 ignoring
the endogeneity issue will end up
being greater than the true value of Beta 1.
So the basic OLS estimation,
ignoring endogeneity will end up
overestimating the value of Beta 1.
This is consistent with
the conclusion from our intuitive reasoning just now.
That the effect of education on wage will be
overestimated if we ignore
the positive correlation between education and ability.
The previous example involves only one x variable.
In the more general case of multiple regression,
where there are more than one x variables,
we have a similar result.
As we can formally derive,
the OLS estimator of
the Beta coefficient of a particular x variable,
say Beta j is equal to the true value of
Beta j plus Beta k times Delta j.
Where Beta k measures the impact of
the omitted variable x_k on outcome y.
And Delta j is the slope coefficient of x_j
from regressing the omitted variable
x_k on all x varables.
It measures how the full x varable is correlated with
the omitted variable after
controlling all the other x varables.
Depending on the science of Beta k and the Delta j,
we can determine the direction of the bias.
For example, if the omitted variable
negatively affects the outcome,
so Beta k is negative,
and the omitted variable is positively
correlated with the focal endogenous x variable.
So Delta j is
positive and then the bias will be negative.
And the OLS estimation ignoring the endogeneity
will end up under
estimating the true coefficient value Beta j.
The other scenarios can be analyzed similarly.
Unfortunately, endogeneity is way
too common in applications,
and hence becomes a major challenge for
causal analysis based on
observational data in almost all contexts.
Unless we are dealing with
carefully designed randomized controlled experiments,
it is actually very hard to find
a context that is free of endogeneity concerns.
Examples are pervasive, and just to name a few here.
Let's say, for example,
I want to analyze
how much class participation can
help improve students academic performance.
So I collected data on
students grades and
class participation records in the past.
If I simply regress students grades on
their class participation rates
using the usual OLS regression,
I may see a significantly positive coefficient
for class participation.
However, if I simply based on that and conclude
that class participation does
significantly boost the student's academic performance,
I may end up overestimating
the effects of class participation.
The reason is that class participation
is largely a choice,
and it could be correlated with
many unobserved factors that
would also affect the final performance.
For example, let's say self motivation
which is unobservable,
but will surely affect the performance.
Hence, it is an omitted variable
and enters the error term.
It is very likely that self-motivation is
also correlated with class participation.
Students with higher levels of motivation may
be more motivated to attend each class actively.
Such a correlation makes
the x variable class participation endogenous,
and hence causes the endogeneity issue.
Since the omitted variable,
self-motivation can be expected to be
positively correlated with
the focal x variable class participation,
and it also positively affects
the y variable, the grade performance.
As we have analyzed,
it will cause positive bias and cause the OLS estimator,
ignoring the endogeneity to overestimate
the effect of class participation on grade performance.
Intuitively reasoning.
Students who participate in
class actively do well in coursework,
not only because of class participation per se,
but also because they are also likely to be
highly motivated students who say spend
a lot of time and effort after class to read,
practice, and absorb everything taught in class.
Attributing the out performance entirely to
class participation alone would
hence be an overstatement.
This he serves as
a typical example of endogeneity problems.
Other examples of endogeneity
can also be easily sought of.
For example, if we simply regress the crime rates of
different city districts on
the police forces deployed to these districts,
we may surprisingly find a positive coefficient.
If we then simply conclude that
more police forces would lead to higher crime rates,
that would obviously be misleading.
Intuitively, we should expect
a negative coefficient for
police force on the crime rate.
That is more police force can reduce the crime rate.
What's missing here is
the safety characteristics of different districts.
Generally, more police forces are deployed to
those districts that are
expected to have higher crime rates.
In other words, a district safety characteristics,
which enter the error term as
an omitted variable are
correlated with the focal x variable,
the police force deployment,
and hence causes the endogeneity issue here.
Ignoring it could lead to
a significant overestimation of
the coefficient for police force,
turning it from otherwise negative to positive.
Similarly, if we simply regress
the historical demand of a certain product on its price,
we may surprisingly find a positive coefficient
which appears to suggest that
a higher price leads to a higher demand,
which could obviously be very misleading because
a higher price is supposed to
suppress demand if everything else is equal.
So what's missing here is
the potential so called demand shocks.
Again, price is a decision variable,
and companies raise prices when they see
certain demand shocks that are
expected to increase the demand from consumers.
In other words, the unobserved demand shocks inside
the ton are likely to be correlated with the price,
which causes the endogeneity issue,
resulting in an overestimation of the coefficient of
price turning it from otherwise, negative to positive.
Another example would be regressing
consumer spending on their participation
in some promotional program.
Simple OLS regression may lead to the conclusion that
consumers spend a lot more
after signing up for the promotional program.
However, what's missing here is that those
consumers who sign up for the promotional program
maybe those who are interested in
this company's product in
the first place and intended to spend anyway.
Ignoring such an endogeneity issue would overestimated
the effects of the promotional program
on boosting consumer spending,
which could result in misled business decisions.
As we said, unfortunately,
endogeneity issues are present in
almost all empirical settings
involving observational data.
However, one very important question is,
when do we need to worry about endogeneity?
If our goal is only to predict
the outcome variable based on
the values of the independent variables,
then we don't need to be bothered
too much with endogeneity concerns.
This is because even if
the error term is correlated with the x variables,
as long as the same correlation remains in the new data,
which we'll use to predict the y values,
then using the OLS result
for the prediction will still be valid in general.
Endogeneity becomes a real problem when our goal is to
perform causal analysis and
to derive causal implications.
That is, if we want to measure
the causal effects of a particular x variable on
the outcome of interest just like
the partial or marginal effects
we have been driving previously,
so that we want to say something like if
a particular x variable changes
whereas everything else stays the same,
how much will that cause the outcome to change?
Then we will have to take care
of the endogeneity issues properly.
Because as we see,
simple OLS estimation will
result in biased and misleading measures.
Then how can we tackle endogeneity issues?
Well, there are many different approaches that have been
developed to help alleviate endogeneity concerns.
And one can easily spend
a whole five year PhD study to learn
this method and still struggle with
endogeneity issues in their research analysis.
Remember, there is no perfect solution
to the endogeneity problem.
Unless we can do carefully designed
and well controlled randomized experiments,
none of these listed methods
can eliminate endogeneity concerns perfectly
and deliver 100% clean causality
for analysis based on observational data.
They can only help eliminate some aspects of
the possible sources of endogeneity and to some degree,
mitigate the endogeneity concerns.
And we often utilize multiple methods
in the same research analysis to minimize
the endogeneity concerns and to enhance our confidence
that our results should be
close enough to the true causality.
Notice that even randomized
controlled experiments are not that easy
to design and oftentimes
still suffer from potential confounding factors,
it is usually easier to design
randomized control experiments in
natural science such as physics and chemistry,
where we can control all the other possible variables and
only the focal variable change
so as to tease out its true causal effects.
However, in social science such
as business and economics research,
it is very hard if not impossible at all,
to design a perfect randomized controlled experiment
in real world settings.
Simply because there are
so many potential confounding factors at play in reality.
Therefore, even the causal effects derived from
experimental studies may still need
to be taken with some grains of thought.
Given the limit of our time,
we'll focus on one classical method with
a solid theoretical foundation to tackle endogeneity.
That is the instrumental variable or IV approach.
We'll introduce the details of
the IV approach in the next video.
This is an overview of
causal analysis and endogeneity concerns.
We went over examples of endogeneity issues and discuss
the causes and the symptoms
both intuitively and rigorously.
We introduced the possible treatments for endogeneity,
and particularly mentioned
the caveats about their limitations.
Hope this video helps bring this advanced yet
very important issue to your attention
and helps to give you a good understanding of it.
That's all for this video. Thanks for watching.