>> Hello, everyone. Welcome back.
In the previous video, we provided an overview
of causal analysis and the endogeneity problems.
We discussed the causes, symptoms,
and the possible treatments of endogeneity problems.
In this video, we'll explain in detail
one classical and
a commonly applied treatment for endogeneity,
the instrumental variable or IV approach.
Let's get started. We'll start
with what instrumental variables are and how they work
and introduce two essential requirements for valid IV.
That is exogeneity and relevance.
We'll then introduce the IV estimator in a general form.
We'll further introduce an alternative and
a common approach to apply instrumental variables.
That is the two-stage least square estimation.
We'll discuss the equivalence between
two-stage least square and IV estimation
and the intuition behind.
To introduce the concept of instrumental variables,
let's start with the simplest case where there is
only one x variable
so it's the so called simple regression.
Suppose this x variable is endogenous,
so it is correlated with the error term u.
The covariance between u and this x variable is not zero.
As we explained previously,
we cannot perform the usual OLS estimation
in this case because
the Beta coefficient estimator would be
biased without properly addressing the endogeneity issue.
Now, suppose we can find a new variable z,
which is different from x,
and this new variable is exogenous,
which means it is uncorrelated with error term u.
The covariance between z and the u is zero.
If we can find such a variable,
then we can use this variable to help us consistently
estimate the Beta coefficient and
the correct the bias caused by endogeneity.
Here is how it works.
We can first write the covariance
between z and u as this by
substituting the expression of u as equal
to y minus Beta_0 minus Beta_1*x.
We can then expand that covariance.
It's equal to the covariance between z and
y minus the covariance between z and Beta_1*x.
Notice that the covariance between z and the Beta_0
is simply zero because Beta_0 is a constant,
so it doesn't vary.
Because the covariance between z and u is zero,
so this expression is equal to 0.
Therefore, the coefficient Beta_1 can be derived as this.
The covariance between z and y
divided by the covariance between z and x.
Notice that in order for this ratio to be valid,
the denominator cannot be zero, therefore,
we need to require the covariance
between z and x not to be equal to 0.
In other words, z needs to be correlated with x.
Now, if this new variable z
can satisfy these two conditions,
that is, it is exogenous,
so it's uncorrelated with the error term u,
and it is relevant,
that is it is correlated with the endogenous x variable.
Then we say this new variable z
is a valid instrumental variable.
Utilizing this instrumental variable,
we can estimate the coefficient Beta_1
according to this expression.
For estimation purposes, we'll use
that sample covariance instead, like this.
Here, x bar, y bar,
and z bar are the average values of x,
y, and z in the data sample.
The covariance between z and y is
simply the difference between each z_i and
the z bar times the difference between each
y_i and y bar summed over all observation.
Similarly for the covariance between z and x.
The ratio calculated this way
gives us the IV estimator of Beta_1.
As we can show, the IV estimator of Beta_1 is
a consistent estimator of the true value of Beta_1,
even in the presence of endogeneity.
Notice that the IV estimator
of Beta_1 will be different from
the OLS estimator of Beta_1 when x is endogenous.
As we discussed, with endogeneity,
the OLS estimation of Beta_1 will be biased,
either greater than or less
than the true value of Beta_1,
depending on the direction of
the correlation between x and the error term.
However, the IV estimator is
able to correct such a bias caused by endogeneity,
and can consistently estimate the true value of Beta_1.
The only case when the IV estimator is equivalent to
the OLS estimator is when there is no endogeneity at all,
and the x serves as its own IV.
As I already mentioned,
there are two key requirements
for an instrumental variable to be valid.
First, the instrumental variable has to be exogenous.
That is, it has to be uncorrelated with the error term,
which includes all of the unobserved factors,
including the omitted variables
that cause the endogeneity.
Such an exogeneity requirement ensures that
the covariance between the IV and the error term is zero.
The second requirement is that
the instrumental variable needs to be
relevant in that it has to
be correlated with the endogenous x variable.
As a result, the covariance between the IV and
the endogenous x variable should not be equal to 0.
Simple as they may sound,
these two requirements oftentimes
contradict each other in practice,
making them very hard to be satisfied at the same time.
Therefore, it's not easy to find a good valid IV.
Intuitively, a good IV
ought to be some external perturbation,
ideally, some random perturbation out of the picture.
Because the IV is supposed
to be uncorrelated with the error term,
which contains all unobserved factors
that may affect an outcome,
including the omitted variables
that cause the endogeneity.
The IV needs to be uncorrelated
with all of these unobservable factors.
Intuitively, the IV needs to have
no direct effects on
y after all x variables are controlled for,
and it should especially be independent of
the omitted variables that cause the endogeneity.
Therefore, a good choice to
satisfy the exogeneity requirement would
be some out of the picture
and close to random external perturbation.
However, life is not easy.
If we simply pick some purely random perturbation,
that has nothing to do with
the problem being studied at all,
then very likely, it is
also uncorrelated with the endogenous x variable,
which would then violate the relevance requirement.
A good IV has to satisfy
these two seemingly contradictory
requirements at the same time.
On one hand, it needs to have no direct impact on y
and has nothing to do with
the omitted variables that cause the endogeneity.
On the other hand, it needs to be somehow
highly correlated with the focal x variable.
This is what makes finding
a good valid IV a challenging task.
Take the study of return on education as an example.
As we have analyzed in the previous video,
the focal x variable is a person's years of schooling.
The y variable is a person's wage.
Because a person's innate ability is not observed,
but it may affect the wage a person can earn and may
be correlated with a
person's education choice at the same time,
so ability is an omitted variable
in the error term that causes the endogeneity issue.
To find a proper IV in this context,
on one hand, this IV needs to be exogenous.
It needs to be independent of
a person's ability and it has
no direct impact on
a person's wage after
years of schooling is controlled for.
On the other hand, it needs to be relevant.
It needs to be strongly correlated
with the years of schooling a person receives.
Now, think about what IV you would choose.
There are several IVs
proposed in past studies on this topic.
One possibility is whether
a person lives near a four-year college.
The argument is, whether a person
lives near a four-year college should not be
correlated with a person's innate ability
and should have no direct impact on the earning,
so it ought to be exogenous.
On the other hand, living close
to a college could lower the cost
of attending college and
raise the perceived benefits of education,
especially among children with
relatively poor family backgrounds.
Therefore, proximity to a college is
likely to be positively
correlated with years of schooling,
making it hard to satisfy
the relevance requirement as well,
which therefore makes it a valid IV.
Another choice of the IV is probably more interesting,
which is a person's quarter of birth.
It's easy to argue that in
which quarter a person was born should have
nothing to do with the person's ability
and earning so it is exogenous.
However, how does the timing of
birth correlate with years of schooling?
The argument is interesting.
There is typically a cutoff date for school start,
and students are required to
enter school if they turn six
before that date and they will
wait for one more year after that date.
Therefore, in the same school year,
some students are older than others
depending on how their birth
dates compare to the cutoff date.
In the meantime, compulsory
schooling laws typically require
students to remain in school until their 16th birthdays.
Therefore, students may be in
different school years when they
reach this legal job out age,
again, depending on their birth days.
As a result, the quarter of birth is likely to be
correlated with the years of
schooling a person eventually chooses to receive,
which interestingly was indeed
the case as found in earlier Census data.
In this sense, that quarter of birth
appears to satisfy the relevance requirement as well,
which therefore makes it a valid IV.
As we can see from this interesting examples,
to find a good valid IV
sometimes does need some creativity.
We have just introduced the IV estimation using
the example of simple regression
that involves only one x variable,
which can help you understand
the instrument requirements more easily.
Now, let me quickly show you
the general form of IV estimation,
where there are multiple independent variables,
among which more than one are endogenous.
Let's say this is the multiple regression model we have.
There are k+m independent variables.
Among them, k independent variables are
endogenous, denoted as x_1-x_k.
And the rest m independent variables are
exogenous denoted as z_k+1-z_k+m.
Now, because we have k endogenous variables,
we need to find k instrumental variables.
Remember, for IV estimation,
we need to have one instrumental variable
for each endogenous independent variable.
For those independent variables that are exogenous,
like z_k+1-z_k+m in this model,
they can simply serve as
their own instruments because they are
exogenous and also relevant
as they are certainly correlated with themselves.
So we do not need to find
any new instruments for
the exogenous independent variables.
However, for each endogenous independent variable,
like x_1-x_k in this model,
we need to find a new
instrumental variable for each of them.
Therefore, since we have
k endogenous independent variables,
we need k additional variables to serve as the IVs.
Let's denote them as z_1-z_k.
Each instrument z needs to satisfy
both the exogeneity and the relevance requirements.
That is z has to be uncorrelated with the error term,
but correlated with the corresponding x variable.
Given these instruments,
we can write down these equations.
They are essentially sample averages to represent
the expected values of
the corresponding random variables.
The first equation corresponds to the fact that
the expected value of the error term u is equal to 0.
Notice that y_i minus this is
simply equal to u_i according to the original model.
The second equation corresponds to the fact
that z_1 should be uncorrelated with u.
So the expected value of z_1*u = 0.
The rest equations are
similar and they correspond to the fact
that each of the instruments is uncorrelated with u.
So the expected value of each z*u = 0.
Notice that here, we included
not only the k new instruments we
found but also
the exogenous independent variables
in the original model.
Therefore, we have k+m+1 equations in total.
Now, how many unknowns do we have?
Here, the Beta coefficients are unknowns so
we have k+m+1 unknowns in total,
including the intercept Beta_0.
We have the same number of equations as the unknowns,
therefore, we can exactly solve for these unknowns.
As a result, the solutions to this system of
k+m+1 equations is the IV estimator
for the k+m+1 Beta coefficients.
Mathematically, we can express the solution
easily in some matrix form, which I'll skip here.
And this is the general form of IV estimation.
As we can see, general IV estimation follows
the same idea as
the simple regression case we just explained.
We need to find the same number of new instruments
as the number of endogenous
independent variables in the model,
and each instrument needs to satisfy
the same exogenity and the relevance requirements.
Notice that the IV estimator can
be derived in closed form just like
the OLS estimators so it
can be very quickly calculated in real applications.
We have explained in detail what instrumental variables
are and how to perform the standard IV estimation.
In practice, however, there is
an alternative approach to apply instrumental variables.
And actually, this alternative approach is used
even more commonly than
the standard IV estimation just introduced.
This is because unlike the standard IV estimation,
where the number of instrumental variables has to
equal the number of endogenous independent variables,
this alternative approach can easily
accommodate more instrumental variables
than endogenous variables.
And the whole estimation approach can be
intuitively described and easily applied
as well so it's oftentimes
the default method to apply instrumental variables.
This is the so called two-stage least square approach,
as we're going to explain next.
Let's start with the usual multiple regression model,
where there are multiple independent variables
to keep the discussion simpler and clearer.
>> Let's focus on the case where there is
only one endogenous variable denoted as x_1.
So x_1 is correlated with the error term u.
The other independent variables are exogenous,
so they are uncorrelated with u.
To differentiate, we will denote
those exogenous independent variables as zs, z_1-zk.
In addition, let's say we have found m
additional instrumental variables denoted as z_k+1-z_k+m.
These m variables are
exogenous by the requirements of IVs.
Notice that here, we have
only one endogenous independent variable,
so we require m to be at least one,
that is greater than or equal to one.
In other words, for
the two-stage least square approach to work,
we need to have at least as many instrumental variables
as endogenous variables.
However, unlike the standard IV estimation,
where we need to have exactly the same number of
instrumental variables as the number
of endogenous variables,
in two-stage least square,
we can have more instrumental variables
than endogenous variables.
So the number of IVs needs to be greater than
or equal to the number of endogenous variables.
Given such a setting,
here is how we can obtain
that two-stage least square estimator.
As the name suggests,
the approach involves two stages in both of which,
we perform a linear regression
using the least square estimation.
In the first stage, we regress
the endogenous x variable on all exogenous variables,
including the exogenous independent variables
in the original model,
z_1-z_k, and
the additional instrumental variables, z_k+1-z_k+n.
Notice that this is
a different linear regression
from the original regression.
Here, the dependent variable becomes
the endogenous x variable in the original model.
And then the independent variables are
all the exogenous variables available to us,
including the new instrumental variables.
We estimate this model using
the standard ordinary least square
or OLS just as in usual linear regressions,
and obtain the coefficient estimates.
We then calculate the fitted value of
x_1 based on the estimated coefficients.
And this fitted value of x_1 denoted as
x_1 hat is the output of that first stage.
Now, in the second stage,
we come back to the original regression.
However, we'll replace
the original endogenous variable x_1
with that fitted x_1 hat from that first stage result.
We then regress y on
x_1 hat and the original exogenous independent variables,
z_1-z_k using the usual OLS estimation.
And the resulting coefficient estimator Beta hat is
the two-stage least square estimator of
the Beta coefficient in the original model.
Notice that in the second stage,
we do not include the new instrumental variables.
The new instrumental variables are used in
the first stage regression and have been
incorporated into the fitted value of x_1,
which enters the second stage regression.
As we can show, such a two-stage least square estimator
is a consistent estimator of
the true value of
the original Betas even
under the presence of endogeneity.
So how does that two-stage least square estimation relate
to the standard IV estimation we introduced previously?
Recall that the IV estimation requires the number of
new instrumental variables to be exactly the
same as the number of endogenous independent variables.
This is called the just-identified case.
In contrast, two-stage least square estimation
can allow the number of
instrumental variables to be greater than
or equal to the number of endogenous variables.
So two-stage least square estimation can accommodate
both just-identified and over-identified cases.
As we can show when the number of new IVs
is the same as the number of endogenous variables,
two-stage least square estimator is
equivalent to IV estimator.
When the number of new IVs is
greater than the number of endogenous variables,
two-stage least square estimator is equivalent to
IV estimator when we use the fitted x from
the first stage result
of two-stage least square estimation
as the instrument for
the endogenous x variable in the IV estimation.
Notice that this equivalence result also applies to
the case where there are
more than one endogenous x variables.
To deal with more than one endogenous x variables
in two-stage least square estimation,
we simply regress each endogenous x variable
on all exogenous variables separately in
the first stage and use the fitted values to
replace each endogenous x variable
respectively in the second stage.
So it's just a natural extension of the case of
a single endogenous x variable as we just illustrated.
For two-stage least square estimation to work,
the requirements on the instrumental variables are pretty
much the same as those for the standard IV estimation.
First, as we already said,
we need at least as many new instruments
as the number of endogenous variables.
What's different from the IV estimation is
two-stage least square estimation can
accommodate more instruments than endogenous variables.
And, in fact, having more valid instruments
than endogenous variables is actually preferred.
However, notice that there
is an important qualifier here.
These instruments have to be valid.
Same as introduced previously.
Valid instrumental variables need to satisfy
two requirements, exogeneity and relevance.
The instruments need to be exogenous,
so each of them should
be uncorrelated with the error term.
The instruments also need to be relevant,
so they should be correlated
with the endogenous x variables.
In two-stage least square,
we may have more than one instrument
for an endogenous variable.
So technically, the relevance requirement
requires at least one of
the coefficients in front of
the new instrumental variables included in
the first stage regression is non-zero.
The reason why we needed
this requirement is actually not hard to understand.
In two-stage least square estimation,
if the endogenous x variable is
uncorrelated with the instruments at all,
so the coefficient Pi_k+1-Pi_k+m
in the first stage regression are all zero.
Then the fitted x hat simply reduces to
a linear combination of
all the exogenous independent variables
in the original regression model.
If so, when we substitute x hat
into the original regression in the second stage,
we will run into the multicollinearity problem
because x_1 hat is
just a linear combination of these same z variables.
So Beta_1 will not be
separately identifiable from the other Betas.
This is why the relevance requirement
requires at least one
of these m coefficients here must be non-zero.
In practice, we simply would like each instrument to
be correlated with the endogenous variable
as strongly as possible.
Notice that if the correlation is not equal to zero,
but very close to zero,
then we have the so-called weak instruments.
Keep in mind that weak instruments are not helpful.
Weak instruments can cause the variance
of the coefficient estimate to be very large.
Note that although in theory,
two-stage least square is able to correct
the bias and recover the two coefficient value,
but that is true only in expectation.
With weak instruments,
the actual estimated value of the coefficient may end up
being very far away from
its expected value as a result of the large variance.
In this sense, the general notion is that
we should avoid using weak instruments
at all because weak instruments
could be even more detrimental than no instrument.
If we cannot find good,
valid instruments with strong correlation
with the endogenous variable,
we'd better not use instrumental variables at
all and try some other methods instead.
Having explained the details of
that two-stage least square approach,
let's summarize by discussing
the intuition behind the two-stage least square.
Why can the two-stage approach designed
this way properly account for endogeneity?
Well, in the first stage,
we regress the focal endogenous independent variable
on all the exogenous variables,
including the exogenous independent variables in
the original model and the new instrumental variables.
Essentially, what we are doing is to
decompose the endogenous x variable into two parts.
One part is that fitted x,
which is a linear combination of all exogenous variables.
The other part is that residual v,
which is the difference between
the endogenous variable x and that fitted value x hat.
Notice that this residual v is not the
same as the error term u in the original model.
This residual is obtained from
the first stage regression result
by subtracting x hat from x.
Therefore, by construction,
this residual v is orthogonal to and hence
uncorrelated with x hat
and all the exogenous variables constituting it.
Because all exogenous variables are uncorrelated with
the error term u as
a linear combination of all these exogenous variables,
x hat is also
exogenous and uncorrelated with the error term u.
In this sense, what the first stage does is to
decompose
the originally endogenous x variable into two parts.
The first part, x hat,
is exogenous and uncorrelated with the error term.
All the endogenous components inside
the original x that caused the correlation
with the error term u are now isolated into
the residual v. So
the residual v should be
correlated with the error term u.
In other words, the first stage
of regression's purpose is to
purge the endogenous x variable
off its correlation with the error term.
After the purge,
the remaining x hat is exogenous and
uncorrelated with the error term u
free of endogeneity anymore.
In the second stage, substitute the decomposition of
the endogenous x variable from
the first stage regression into the original model.
So the original x_1 is replaced with
x_1 hat + v
and then multiplied by the coefficient Beta_1.
We only keep x_1 hat and
combine Beta_1*v with the error term u.
We can view the new term u +
Beta_1*v as the new error term,
say e because x_1 hat
is a linear combination of all exogenous variables,
so it is exogenous and
uncorrelated with the original error term u.
It is also uncorrelated with
the residual v by construction as we just analyzed.
Therefore, x_1 hat is uncorrelated with
the entire new error term e. By the same reasoning,
all the other exogenous z variables
in the original model are also
uncorrelated with the new error term e. Therefore,
by replacing x_1 with x_1 hat,
the second stage regression model
is free of the endogeneities.
We can therefore simply regress y on x_1 hat and
the z_1- zk using the usual OLS estimation.
And the resulting Beta coefficient estimator is
a consistent estimator of
the true value of the original Beta coefficient.
This is why the two-stage least square approach can
work properly to correct for the endogeneity issue.
Now, where do the two requirements
for the instrumental variables come in?
First, of course, the instruments need to be
exogenous so that the fitted x hat can be exogenous.
They need to be relevant in that,
the first stage of regression needs to
include at least one additional instrument,
and it's coefficient cannot be zero.
Because otherwise, x_1 hat would reduce to
a linear combination of
the original exogenous variables, z_1-z_k.
Then placing x_1 hat together with
z_1-z_k in the second stage regression
would cause perfect collinearity,
which would cause Beta_1's value to be unidentifiable.
This is why both the exogeneity
and the relevance requirements for
the instruments need to be satisfied in
order for the two-stage
least square approach to work properly.
This is all we want to
introduce about instrumental variables.
In this video, we discussed what
instrumental variables are, how they work,
and the two essential requirements for valid IVs,
exogenity and the relevance.
We then introduced the standard IV estimator,
which only works in just identified cases,
and a more commonly applied alternative approach
two-stage least square,
which can also accommodate overidentified cases,
where there are more instruments
than the endogenous variables.
We discussed the equivalence between
these two approaches and
the intuition behind
the two-stage least square estimation.
Endogeneity and instrumental variables are
advanced and relatively complex concepts.
But they are critical for anyone
who would like to perform causal analysis.
Therefore, please be sure to well
understand what we discussed on this topic.
That's all for this video. Thanks for watching.