>> Hello, everyone. Welcome back.
In this video, we are going to demonstrate
how to apply instrumental variables in
R to address potential endogeneity issues
and to perform causal analysis.
We'll perform two-stage least square,
both manually and using a package.
We'll then compare the coefficient
estimates with and without
IVs and discuss what are
the effects of potential endogeneity issues.
Let's get started. The dataset
we're going to work on for this demonstration is
a simplified version of the
classical and frequently cited dataset
on return of education first
proposed by David Card in 1995.
The dataset records a large number of
individuals with their years
of schooling and hourly wage.
As an illustration, we keep the data simple and
include a subset of the individuals and a few variables.
For each individual, we have observed
their hourly wage since years of schooling,
years of post-school experience,
calculated as age minus education minus six.
We also include a few variables that could
potentially serve as instrumental variables,
which include an indicator of whether
each individual lives near a four-year college or not.
The individual's father's years of
schooling and the individual's
mother's years of schooling.
We'd like to see whether and how much years of
schooling can help an individual to earn a higher wage.
Apparently, years of education is
an endogenous variable here because the length of
education is a choice variable of
each individual and is affected by lots of
observable factors that may also
affect the earning capability of each individual.
For example, the innate ability,
financial and social resources, etc.
This hence constitutes a classical example
of endogeneity caused by omitted variables.
Simply regressing earnings on years of
education will lead to
biased estimation of return on education.
We need to properly account for the endogeneity issue.
Funding and using some appropriate instrumental variables
would be a good solution.
Now, let's switch to R to perform the analysis.
To apply IV regression in R,
we can use this external package called AER.
As usual, we need to first download and install
this package using the install.package function.
We'll then use the library function to
load the package into the current R session.
Again, installation needs to be done only once,
but we need to render library function to load
the package each time we use it in a new R session.
As usual, the data have already been
organized and stored in a CSV file.
Use the read.csv function to read in the data.
Again, be sure to save the data file
under the working directory of R Studio,
or you need to explicitly specify
the full directory as part of the filename.
Save the imported data into
a data frame variable named mydata.
We can use the str function to
quickly examine the structure of the data frame.
Next, let's first run
the regular OLS estimation
without accounting for the endogeneity issue.
Before running the linear regression,
we can first take a quick look at
the distribution of the dependent variable, wage's value.
Let's plot the histogram of wage values.
As we can see, the distribution of
wage values is right-skewed,
having a few high wage values as outliers.
For a dependent variable whose
distribution is right-skewed,
a common approach is to use
the logarithm of that variable instead of the raw value.
After taking the logarithm,
the originally right-skewed distribution
can be more symmetric.
To see this, we can quickly plot
the histogram of log of wage.
As we can see, the distribution of log wage is more
symmetric and it can be better
approximated by the usual normal distribution assumption.
Therefore, instead of using
the raw wage value as
the dependent variable in the linear regression,
we can use log wage instead.
Just be careful with the interpretation
of the Beta coefficients in this case.
When the dependent variable is log wage,
what a Beta coefficient measures is
the percentage change in
wage caused by one unit change in an x variable,
as we have explained previously.
We can use the usual lm function
to perform the linear regression.
Regress log of wage on years of
education and the years of post-graduation experience.
Notice that here we add a quandratic term
of experience or experience squared into
the regression as an illustration
to show you how to account for
possible nonlinear relationship between
the y variable and some x variable.
Notice that in the model formula specification in R,
to include the quadratic term of an x variable,
we cannot simply use ^2
because ^2 has special meaning in model formula,
which represents up to two-way interactions,
whose exact meaning is
totally irrelevant to what we want to do here.
Therefore, to indicate,
we'd like to include
the quadratic term experience
squared into the regression.
We need to use the I function,
which stands for the identity function meaning as is.
Here, I experience squared simply means to
include the term experience
squared as is into the regression.
Run the lm function and summarize the results.
This is the OLS estimation results
without accounting for the potential endogeneity issue.
Notice that the coefficient for education is about
0.09 and is significant at 99.9% confidence level.
It indicates that one additional year of education could
increase a person's expected hourly wage by about 9%.
However, due to the potential endogeneity issue,
this coefficient estimate might be biased here.
It may overestimate or
underestimate the true coefficient for education.
So next, we'd like to use
some instrumental variables to account
for the potential endogeneity issue
and adjust the coefficient estimates.
In our dataset, we have
three additional variables that
could be considered as I candidates,
namely whether an individual
lives near a four-year college,
father's years of schooling,
and mother's years of schooling.
Now, think, among these variables,
which one or ones could be
an appropriate instrumental variable or variables?
Recall the requirements for IV are
twofold, exogeneity and relevance.
That is, the instrumental variable
needs to be uncorrelated with
the error term or
the unobserved variables that
cause the endogeneity problem.
Meanwhile, the IV needs to be highly
correlated with the endogenous independent variable.
Based on these two criteria,
I'll leave it to you to think which will be
the most appropriate instrumental variable here and why?
For now, let's use father's years of education and
the mother's years of education
as the instrumental variables.
Let's use the two-stage least square
to perform the IV regression.
We'll first perform the two-stage least square
manually and then use
an external package to perform
the same analysis and compare
to see if the results are consistent.
To perform the two-stage least square explicitly,
we will do it in two steps.
First, regress the endogenous independent variable on
all exogenous independent variables
and the instrumental variables.
The syntax is the same as usual.
Use the lm function to perform the linear regression.
In the model formula,
the dependent variable of that first-stage regression
is the endogenous independent
variable in the original model,
which is the variable education.
The independent variables include
the instrumental variables we have chosen,
which are father's education and the mother's education,
as well as the exogenous
independent variables in the original model,
which is the variable experience.
Notice that we also included
the quadratic term, experience squared as previously,
just to state consistent,
using the same I function to mean as is.
Execute the regression and summarize the output.
As we explain, to more
formally test the strengths of the IV,
we would usually use the F test,
a concept we didn't introduce.
Loosely speaking, we can roughly use the T statistic of
the first-stage coefficients to
check the strengths of the IVs.
As we can see here, the coefficients
for father's education and mother's education
are positive and significant at 99.9% confidence level,
which indicates there is significant positive correlation
between the two instrumental variables
and the endogenous independent variable.
The relevance requirement for
the IVs appears to be satisfied.
Therefore, we can move on to the second stage,
which is to perform the original regression by replacing
the original endogenous independent variable
with the fitted value from the first-stage regression.
To obtain the fitted y from the first stage.
We can simply use the fitted function
and supply the regression output
from the first stage as the argument.
Use this fitted y to
replace the original endogenous independent variable,
education, and specify the original regression as usual.
That is, to regress log of wage on fitted education,
experience, and experience squared.
Save the result and display the summary.
As we can see, these are
the estimation results from the two-stage least square.
This is the two stage least square estimate
of the coefficient for
education after applying the two instrumental variables,
father's education and the mother's education.
Assuming that two IVs satisfy the exogeneity requirement,
this estimate should be able to account for
the potential endogeneity issue and
properly measure the marginal effect
of years of schooling on wage.
The estimated coefficient value indicates
that one additional year of education
could increase a person's expected hourly wage
by about 15%.
To further verify that
the two-stage least square estimation we
have performed manually is indeed correct.
We can use some pre-programmed routine
to perform the same analysis.
We can install and loaded this package called AER and use
the ivreg function included in
this package to perform the IV regression,
which is implemented by two-stage least square.
The syntax of ivreg works as this.
First, specify the dependent variable as usual,
then queue the operator,
then list all the independent variables
in the original regression,
including the endogenous independent variable.
Followed by a pipe sign,
and then list all the exogenous variables,
including the exogenous variables in
the original regression and the instrumental variables.
Save the output, run the ivreg function,
and the summarize the results.
As we can see, the coefficient estimates
from the ivreg function are exactly the
same as those from
our manual implementation of
the two-stage least square estimation.
Finally, let's co-list the coefficient estimates
from the regular OLS and the two-stage least square.
As we can see, the regular OLS,
without accounting for the potential endogeneity
of the education variable,
ends up underestimating the marginal effect
of education on earning.
This result is actually
somewhat surprising and counterintuitive.
Now, based on what we have
explained about how the correlation between
the endogenous independent variable
and the error term would
result in bias of
the OLS estimator in different directions.
Think what such an underestimation implies.
Does it mean the endogenous education variable
is positively or negatively
correlated with the error term?
Can you come up with some possible explanations?
I'll leave this thinking to you as an exercise.
These are all we want to
demonstrate for instrumental variables.
This is a very important topic.
Hope this example can help you
better understand the related concepts.
That's all for this video. Thanks for watching.