>> In this video,
we're going to demonstrate how to implement
the important concepts related to binary response models
in R. We will implement
both the linear probability models
and the logit or probit models.
We'll show how to construct
the confusion matrix to calculate
the percent correctly predicted
to evaluate the model performance.
We will also practice the calculation of
important concepts such as the predicted probability of
success and the partial effect by first using
the defining formula and then verifying
our calculation results with the output from R functions.
Through this way, you can deepen your understanding
of where all these important measures come from,
what they actually mean,
and how to correctly apply and
interpret them in practical context.
Let's get started. The data
set we're going to work on for
this demonstration is the bank customer acquisition data.
Suppose a local bank sends a promotional offer to
its current customers to
invite them to open a certain account.
Some customers accepted the offer and
opened the account, whereas others didn't.
The bank recorded
the acquisition outcome for each customer,
along with other information.
It wants to understand what types of
customers are more likely
to accept the promotional offer,
and what characteristics or variables are
associated with a higher probability
of successful acquisition.
As we can see, this can be
modeled as a binary response problem,
and the logit model is well
suited to help answer these questions.
The data set we will use consists of a sample of
1,000 customers who received the promotion offer.
We have their age income, home value,
the distance from their home to the nearest bank branch,
and whether he or she has
an existing loan with this bank or not.
Finally, we recorded the acquisition outcome
for each customer with
one representing a successful acquisition
and zero as unsuccessful.
Now let's see how we can apply
binary response models to this data set.
As usual, the data have already
been organized and stored in a CSV file.
Use the reader.csv function to read in the data.
Again, be sure to save the data file
under the working directory of R Studio,
or you need to explicitly
specify the full directory as part of the file name.
Reader.csv function sets header to be true by
default so we don't really need
to explicitly specify header to be true.
Save the imported data into
a data frame variable named my data.
We can call the STR function to check
the structure of the imported dataset.
Notice that the variable long is
currently stored as a character variable.
In fact, it's
a binary or categorical variable, yes or no.
We should turn it into
a factor with two categories or levels.
Use the s.factor function
to convert the long variable into
a factor and save
the converted variable back to
the original variable to overwrite it.
We can call the STR function again to
examine the structure of that DataFrame.
As we can see, the long variable now has
been turned into a factor with two levels.
Now the data have been properly imported
and we are ready to perform the analysis.
Let's first apply that linear probing model.
As we explained previously,
we can estimate a linear probing model in
exactly the same way as
estimating a regular linear regression model,
regressing the now binary y variable on the x variables.
Therefore, we can use
the same lm function in
R to estimate a linear probolin model.
Follow the same syntax,
regress the y variable acquisition
on all the other x variables.
Again, here, we use the dot operator to
represent all variables in
the dataset other than those already listed.
Save the regression output to a variable.
As usual, we can summarize
the regression output using
the summary function and take a quick look.
We see the usual coefficient table
with the estimation results for all x variables.
Notice that the first four variables are all
new miracle variables included
in the original regression model.
Well as the last variable,
loan yes is actually a dummy variable automatically
created by R to represent the categorical variable loan,
which we have just converted
into a factor with two levels.
Be sure to recall how
to interpret a dummy variable like this.
As we explained previously,
the difference between linear probability models and
regular linear regression models is that
the predictor y has a slightly different meaning.
In linear probability models,
the predictor y represents
the predicted probability of
success for a particular observation.
Because the probability of success is simply
modeled as a linear combination of all x variables
there is no guarantee that it will always fall
between zero and one as a valued probability measure,
which is hence a major drawback
of linear probability models.
Now, let's quickly examine if there
are any observations in our data whose
predicted probabilities of success indeed
fall outside of the range of zero to one.
Recall that to find the predicted y,
we can simply use
the predictor function and supply the regression output.
We can do the same here as well.
The predictor function will give us a vector of
the predictor y for
all data observations in our data set.
We have 1,000 observations in
the data sample and we don't
want to display all the
1,000 predicted probabilities of success.
Instead, we want to see if there's
any one greater than one or less than zero.
What we can do is to first sort
them in an ascending order
by default from small to large.
And then display the 10 smallest values
and the 10 largest values.
By examining these smallest and the largest values,
we can see if there's any one out of the valued bounds.
The head function will give us
the first several values in the vector,
and the tail function
will give us the last several values.
We specify 10 to get the first 10 and the last 10 values.
As we can see, the smallest 10 predicted
the probabilities of success from
all our data sample are all below zero.
Whereas the largest 10 predicted
the probabilities of success are all below one.
So we have some predicted probabilities
of success below the lower bound,
but we are good with the upper bound.
Again, this example echoes
our previous point that it does happen that
some predicted probabilities of success from
linear probability models could end up as invalid values.
To avoid this problem,
we can turn to the non linear binary response models,
in particular, the logit and probit models.
Notice that because these models are non linear,
we can no longer use the LM function to estimate them.
Instead, there is another function we
can easily use called GLM,
which stands for generalized linear model.
Generalized linear models are a very broad family of
models that incorporate many different types of models,
united under a common umbrella
of a very general form of model specification.
Lots of very useful models are members of this family.
Among them are the logit and the probit models.
If you are interested in generalized linear models,
you can take a separate course or find
some books that are dedicated to this topic,
which can be very helpful.
But here, we can use the GLM function
in R to easily estimate a logit or probit model.
The syntax for model specification
is the same as that for the LM function.
The [inaudible] variable,
tilda, and then the list of independent variables.
Again, we use the.operator
to represent all the other variables.
What's new for the GOM function is that we need
to specify the family and the link function.
The family is binomial here because
we are dealing with binary response models so
the outcome variable is binary and
the link function is essentially
our specification of the error distribution.
If we want to fit a logit model,
then specify the link function as logit.
If we want to fit a probit model,
then just specify the link function as probit.
As usual, specify the data sample
and save the output to a variable.
As we can see, although estimating
a non linear logit model involves
numerical search for the MLE solution,
it still can be done very quickly,
especially when the dataset is not too large.
As usual, we can summarize
the estimation output using the summary function.
As we can see, we get
that same coefficient table as usual,
which can be interpreted in a similar fashion.
With the larger model estimated,
we can then use it to predict
the outcome for each individual customer and
compare the predicted outcome with
the actual outcome to
evaluate the performance of the model.
As we introduced, we can compute
the percent correctly predicted or the
prediction accuracy rate as
the goodness of fit measure for binary response models.
In order to do so, there are two steps.
First, we will need to predict
the binary outcome for each observation.
To do so, there are further sub steps.
We first predicted the probability of success for
each observation according to the estimated logit model.
We'll then compare the predicted probability of
success to a threshold of our choice.
Finally, we can predict those observations with
the predicted probability of success being
greater than the threshold as one or success,
and those observations with predicted the probability of
success being less than the threshold as zero or failure.
We can perform these several steps in
a very neat way in R through vectorized operations.
We can first create a vector of
all ones using the rep function,
which stands for repeat.
We repeat the value one as
many times as the number of rows in our dataset,
which equals the number of
observations in our data sample, 1,000.
This y hat variable is a vector of 1,000 ones.
These are the initial prediction of
the outcome for all observations.
Next, we can do all the steps in one statement.
Be sure to understand
the structure of this statement well.
Let's start with this part.
Here, we use the predicted function to
obtain the predicted probability of success.
Notice that if we just use
the predicted function the same way as before,
what we get would be simply
the linear combination of X and Beta.
This is the predicted probability of
success from linear probability models.
However, it won't be the predicted probability of
success for the non linear logit models.
As we derive, the predicted probability
of success for logit models equals
G(X Beta) where G is
the CDF function of the error term distribution.
To obtain this in R,
we need to specify
the type argument of the predicted function.
Set type to response,
and then what the predicted function returns will
be G(X Beta) rather than X Beta merely.
This will give us
the predicted probability of
success from the logit model.
Notice that what the predicted function returns is still
a vector of the predicted probabilities
of success for all observations.
Next part is the choice of the threshold.
As we said, we could simply use 0.5 as the threshold.
But here in our data,
the fraction of actual successful acquisition
is about 30%,
which is quite less than 0.5.
As we mentioned previously,
a more proper way is to use the fraction of
the actual successes in the data as the threshold.
We can quickly calculate this fraction using
the mean function to compute
the mean of the binary
acquisition values in the original data.
Recall that as we explained before,
the mean of a binary variable simply measures
the fraction of ones
among all the values of that variable.
This will be the threshold we use for comparison.
Now, pay attention to how we make the comparison.
Again, the output of the predicted function is
a vector of 1,000 values that predicted
the probabilities of success for 1,000
customers and the output
of the mean function is just a scalar.
We are comparing a vector to
a scalar. What are we doing then?
We are doing the element wise comparison,
comparing each element of the vector to the scaler and
the result is a vector of 1,000 true or false values,
representing the 1,000 comparison outcomes.
Next, we are inserting this vector of
true or false values as the index of this y hat vector.
What are we doing here? We are doing
the subsetting based on a logical index vector.
As we explained in the introduction to R tutorials,
such subsetting enables us to extract the elements of
the Y hat vector that correspond to
a true value in the logical index vector.
In other words, what we get from this part are
those customers whose predicted probability
of success is less than the threshold.
Finally, we set
the predicted binary outcome
for those customers to be zero.
Recall that the remaining customers
predicted outcomes will be unchanged,
which keep the initial value one.
Altogether, this single R statement completes
all the steps to predict
the binary outcomes for all observations at once.
Those customers whose predicted
the probabilities of success according to the login model
are greater than the threshold
are predicted as successful acquisitions.
Those customers whose predicted
the probabilities of success are less than
the threshold are predicted as
unsuccessful acquisitions and the threshold
used here is the fraction
of actual successes in the original data.
Again, as we can see, vectorized operations
greatly facilitate the handling
of a large number of values and it can
significantly improve the efficiency of programming.
This is some trick we often use.
Be sure to understand this statement very well.
Once we have obtained that
predicted outcomes for all observations,
we can then construct the confusion matrix
to compare them against
the actual outcomes observed in the data.
We can use that table function to
cross tabulate all possible values of
two variables and calculate the count for
each possible combination of
different values of the two variables.
In this sense, the table function in R
resembles the pivot table tool in Excel,
which you may be very familiar with.
We use the table function to
cross tabulate over two variables.
The one storing the predicted outcomes,
Y hat, and the original variable,
storing the actual outcomes, acquisition.
Save the table output and display it.
>> This is the confusion matrix.
As we can see, among the 1,000 observations,
464 have the actual outcomes being zero,
and the predicted outcome also being zero,
which are true negative.
One hundred and sixteen
have the actual outcome being one,
but the predicted outcome being zero.
So they are false negative.
Similarly, we have 220 true positives
and 200 false positives.
To calculate the percent correctly predicated,
we just need to add up the diagonal of
the confusion matrix and divide
it by the sum of all four counts,
as we are doing in this statement.
As we can see, the overall percent correctly
predicted for this logit model is about 68%,
slightly more than two-thirds,
which is a medial cut.
As we said, to fairly and
comprehensively evaluate the performance of a model,
we not only need to evaluate
the overall percent correctly predicted,
but also need to break it down for each possible outcome.
So we can calculate the percent
correctly predicted for each actual outcome,
that is along the two columns
of the confusion matrix here.
We divide cell 1,
1 by the sum of the first column,
and divide cell 2,
2 by the sum of the second column.
As we can see, the breakdown percent correctly
predicted are quite consistent with the overall rate.
The next task we would like to do is to calculate
the predicted probability of
success based on the logit model.
We will do this in two ways.
We will first calculate
the predicted probability of success
based on the defining formula
as we introduced in previous videos.
We will then use that predicted function to obtain
the probability of success
to verify our calculation result.
Recall that this is the defining formula
of the probability of success based on a logit model.
The probability of success equals G(X Beta),
where G is the CDF function of logistic distribution,
which takes this form.
Notice that in order to
calculate the probability of success,
we need to specify the values of
all X variables as well as the Beta coefficients.
For Beta coefficients, we will just plug
in the estimated coefficient values.
We can use that coef function to retrieve
the coefficient estimates from
the logit estimation result.
As we can see, these are the coefficients for
the five X variables as well as the intercept,
which we'll use later.
For the X variables,
we need to specify a certain set of values.
One reasonable choice of x values would be
the mean values of
all numerical X variables in the original data.
We can use the colMeans function to
calculate the column means of the original DataFrame,
which will give us the means of
each column in the original data set,
that is, the mean value of
each variable in the original data sample.
Notice that we only include the first four columns,
which are the four numerical X variables;
age, income, home value,
and distance to bank.
For the last X variable,
loan, which is a binary categorical variable,
we shouldn't use its mean value
because it doesn't make sense,
instead, we can simply set
it to one of the two categories.
Let's say we set a loan to yes.
That is, to calculate
the predicted probability of a success
for customers who have an existing loan with the bank.
Now, we can substitute
these X values and Beta estimates into the formula to
calculate that predicted probability of success based on
our logit model at this given set of X variable values.
For simplicity and clarity,
let's just do it manually.
Type the formula, exp for
exponential function inside which
the linear combination of x and Beta.
Beta_0, which is the coefficient for the intercept,
plus Beta_1, which is the coefficient for age,
times the age value,
which is this mean value we have obtained,
plus Beta_2, which is the coefficient for income,
times the income value,
which is this mean value, plus Beta_3,
which is the coefficient for home value,
times the home value variable,
which is this mean value, plus Beta_4,
which is the coefficient for distance to bank,
times distance to bank variable,
which is this mean value.
Finally, plus Beta_5*X_5. But pay attention here,
X_5 is actually a dummy variable,
representing the yes category
for the binary long variable,
because the value of
the long variable we want to use here is yes,
so we just set the dummy variable to 1,
and the last one is, hence,
Beta_5*1 or just Beta_5 by itself, which is this value.
This long expression gives us the X Beta value,
and the exponential of it forms
the numerator of the probability of success.
And the denominator can be calculated similarly.
It's just 1 plus this big exponential expression.
Now, we have manually created
the formula for the probability of success.
Double-check to ensure everything is correct.
In particular, all parentheses
are properly paired and matched.
Then press "Enter".
As we can see, this is
the predicted probability of success,
based on the logit model estimated from our data,
evaluated at this given set of
X variable values, where age,
income, home value,
distance to bank are at the mean values,
and loan equal to yes.
For an average customer like that,
the probability of successful acquisition is
0.3118894, about 31%.
Next, we'll use the predictor function
to verify our calculation result.
Recall that, as we have just shown above,
calling the predictor function and
passing in the logit estimation result,
we can get that predicted probability of
success automatically calculated for us.
As we said, we need to specify
type=("response") to calculator G(X Beta),
otherwise, what we get would be just X Beta cell.
Notice that if we just use predictor function like that,
what it returns is a vector containing
the predicted probability of success
for each observation in the data sample.
If we want to evaluate the probability of success for
a representative customer at
a certain set of X variable values,
we need to explicitly specify this.
In order to do so, we need to
first create a new data point,
which is saved as a DataFrame.
It contains only one observation with
a particular set of values for
all X variables as we specify here.
Age equals this mean value.
Income equals this mean value.
Home value equals this mean value,
distance to bank equals this mean value.
And finally, loan equals yes.
This newly created data frame
will be used as the data observation,
whose probability of success we'd like to evaluate.
So apply this new data observation to
the new data argument of that predictor function.
We'll get that predicted probability
of success for this particular observation,
based on our logit model estimation results.
As we can see, the output value is
exactly the same as our hand calculation previously.
So now, it should be crystal clear to you
how this important concept is formulated.
Another important concept we'd like
to demonstrate is that partial effect.
As we explained in previous videos,
in non-linear binary response models,
the partial effect equals
the Beta coefficient multiplied by a vector,
which is the PDF of the error term distribution,
and is hence, different across different models.
Therefore, while partial effects
are directly comparable across different models,
the Beta coefficients in
different models are different measures,
and are not comparable to each other.
To see this, let's first compare the Beta coefficients
estimated from the linear probability model
and the logit model.
Again, we can use the coef function to quickly
retrieve the coefficient estimates
from the two estimation result outputs;
the linear probability model,
LPM, and the logit model.
And then we can use cbind to column bind
the two vectors so as to display
the coefficient estimates from
the two models side by side.
As we can quickly examine,
that Beta coefficients from
the two models are generally on different scales.
For example, the coefficients for income,
home value or loan,
they are all of different magnitudes.
So the Beta coefficients are
not directly comparable across
different types of models, however,
if we calculate the partial effects of
X variables from these two types of models,
as we'll see, they are measuring the same effects,
and thus, comparable to each other.
Recall that the partial effect is derived as this,
the Beta coefficient times the PDF of
the error term distribution
evaluated at a certain set of X variable values.
Same as above. We need to pick
some values for the X variables.
Let's use the same set of values.
The mean values for
the four numerical variables and
the yes for the categorical variable, loan.
Use the same statement to create
a new data observation at this set of values.
And then we are ready to
construct the expression for partial effects.
First, calculate the linear combination of X and Beta.
Notice that as we mentioned,
we can obtain this linear combination value
by simply calling
the predictor function without
specifying type=("response").
Be sure to specify
the newly created data observation as the new data.
Next, the g function
is that PDF of the error term distribution.
As we explained, the PDF function
is that density function,
which corresponds to the d function
of a given distribution in R,
as we introduced in detail in previous demonstration.
The PDF of normal distribution is dnorm,
and the PDF of logistic distribution is dlogis.
Here, dlogis of xb
will give us the multiplicative vector,
G(X Beta) as in the formula.
Next, we'll multiply
that Beta coefficient estimates by this vector.
Again, we can use that coef function to
retrieve the estimates of all Beta coefficients at once,
which are written as a vector.
Multiply this vector by the scalar vector.
We are again doing elementwise multiplication.
The result will be a vector as well,
which consists of the partial effect of all X variables,
however, here, we use the index
minus 1 to exclude the first Beta coefficient,
which is Beta_0,
the coefficient for the intercept.
This is because the intercept is not a variable,
so it is meaningless to
calculate the partial effect of a constant.
This expression calculates the partial effects of
all five X variables
following the formula we have derived previously.
Execute it and save the results to a variable.
We'd also like to co-list
the partial effects from
the linear probability model for comparison.
Recall that in linear probability models,
the partial effects simply
equal that Beta coefficients themselves,
a distinctive feature of linear models.
Therefore, we can simply retrieve
the Beta coefficient estimates from
the linear probability model estimation output,
and use them as the partial effects.
Notice that we also exclude
the first coefficient Beta_0 because it is the intercept.
Finally, we can list
the partial effect from the two models side by side,
using the cbind function as usual.
As we can see, each vector consists of
the partial effect of five X variables.
As we can quickly compare,
the partial effects from
these two different types of
models are pretty close to each other,
and thus, directly comparable.
Be sure to understand what partial effects mean.
For example, this value
means as a customer's age increases by one year,
the probability of he or she eventually accepting
the promotional offer and opening
a new account will increase by this much.
About 0.16%.
Now, how about this value?
Again, this is the dummy variable for loan being yes.
So it means compared
to customers without a loan with this bank,
customers with an existing loan
have a greater probability to
accept the promotion offer by this much, about 0.51%.
As we can see, partial effects
directly measure the effects we are interested in.
So they are the key quantities we need to
evaluate after estimating a binary response model.
These are all we want to
demonstrate regarding binary response models.
We have demonstrated all of
the important concepts on
this topic as introduced in previous videos.
Hope it can help deepen
your understanding of
this very important model framework.
That's all for this video. Thanks for watching.