Hello, everyone. Welcome back.
In previous videos, we have
introduced linear regression models in great detail.
Starting from this video,
we are going to introduce some real nonlinear models.
As we'll see from the model specification,
they are no longer linear in Beta coefficients.
So these models will need to be estimated differently.
The series of non linear models
we are going to introduce fall
under the umbrella of
the so called limited dependent variable models,
where the dependent variable can only
take certain restricted values.
We'll start with the so called binary response models,
where the dependent variable is binary,
that is taking only two possible values,
either zero or one.
In this video, we'll start with
the simplest approach to tackle binary response problems,
the linear probability models.
As we'll see, a linear probability model is
a direct application of
a linear regression model
into the binary response setting.
So pretty much all we know about
linear regression models continue to apply.
It thus serves as a very nice transition
from linear models to nonlinear models.
In particular, we'll start with the settings of
binary response problems and then discuss
the setup of linear probability models
and how to estimate it.
We then discuss how to
interpret the model estimation results and
explain an important concept
called partial effect or marginal effect.
We will also identify the strengths
and limitations of linear probability models.
Finally, we'll talk about how to
evaluate the performance of linear probability models,
utilizing the binary nature of the response variable to
compute some specific goodness of fit metric.
Okay, let's get started.
Binary response problems, as the name suggests,
refer to the type of problems where
the dependent variable or
the response variable is binary,
which can only take two possible values,
either one or zero,
either yes or no,
either success or failure.
As you read about binary response problems,
you may find some textbooks
categorize it and classification problems,
whereas some introduce it
as one type of regression models.
So what's the difference
between classification and regression?
Simply put, regression problems are those where
the dependent variable is numerical or quantitative.
It can be either continuous or discrete
as long as the dependent variable takes numerical values.
The task of regression is
to predict the numerical value of
each observations dependent variable as closely
as possible based on the set of independent variables.
In contrast, classification problems refer to those where
the dependent variable is categorical or qualitative.
As we introduced previously,
qualitative variables can be either ordinal or nominal.
But the key feature is that their values
indicate membership to one of several categories.
The task of classification is
to categorize each observation into one
of the several categories as accurately as
possible based on the set of independent variables.
Given such differences, how should we
categorize the binary response problems?
Because binary response problems
have the dependent variable as binary,
either zero or one, which is essentially categorical.
We can view binary response problems
as classification problems.
We'd like to classify each observation
into one of the two categories either zero or one.
This is why you see binary response models are often
introduced as one type of classification methods.
However, the boundary is not that clear cut.
As we'll see in a minute,
how do binary response models
predict the classification of each observation?
Actually, by first predicting
the probability of each observation
belonging to one particular category.
Because the probability is a numerical value,
and it is predicted based
on the set of independent variables.
Binary response models thus
have the structure of regression models.
In this sense, we can also view
binary response models as one type of regression models.
All right. So just as you see,
the boundary between classification
and regression problems
is oftentimes quite blurry.
For binary response problems,
the dependent or outcome variable
takes only two possible values,
either one or zero,
yes or no, success or failure.
We can easily think of many examples.
For example, whether an applicant
is admitted into a program or not,
either yes or no,
either success or failure.
And whether a client defaults on a loan or not,
whether a customer chooses to
participate in a promotion or not,
whether an existing customer chooses to so called chain,
that is to terminate the service with the company or not.
So examples of binary response problems are abundant.
Depending on our needs or preferences,
we can define one outcome as one of
success and the other outcome as zero or failure.
Actually, no matter how we label the two outcomes,
eventually it will be all equivalent.
So as we can see, binary response problems
represent a very general category of common problems.
Common binary response models include
linear probability models and
logic or probability models.
We are going to discuss all of them next.
Let's first start with the linear probability model.
The linear probability model is actually very simple,
very easy to understand, and very easy to estimate,
but we still want to start with it
because it provides us with the foundations
of the binary response framework and serves as
a nice connection and the transition from
linear models to non linear models.
So for a linear probability model,
as its name suggests,
it simply models the probability of
the dependent variable Y equal to
one or the probability of success,
as we'll call it as a linear function like this,
a linear combination of a set of
independent or X variables and their Beta coefficients.
Notice that given the binary nature
of the outcome variable,
Y is a random variable
whose realized value will be
either zero or one with certain probabilities.
So we can write the expected value of Y as this.
It's equal to the probability of Y equal
to one times the realized value
one plus the probability of Y
equal to zero times the realized value zero.
Then the second term disappears because of the zero,
and we have the expected value of Y
equal to the probability of Y equal to one.
Because we model the probability of Y equal to
one as the linear function of all X variables.
So we have the expected value of Y
also equal to this linear function of X variables.
Notice that this is exactly the same as what we
have specified in the standard linear regression models.
Recall that in a linear regression model,
we model Y as equal to the linear function
of X variables plus a random error,
whose expected value is zero.
As a result, the expected value of Y is
simply equal to this linear function of X variables,
which is exactly the same model specification
as the linear probability model here.
Notice that what's different in
the linear probability model is that the actual Y
in the data is binary and
only takes two values, zero or one.
However, the expected value of Y is
continuous numerical value because it
is equal to the probability of Y equal to one.
A probability is a continuous numerical value,
so it can be modeled as
the linear combination of all X variables.
We can therefore estimate
a linear probability model in the same way as we estimate
a regular linear regression model using
the usual ordinary least square or OLS estimation.
We simply regress Y on all the X variables as usual.
Again, here, Y only takes
binary values for each observation,
along with the corresponding X variables values.
The OLS estimation finds
the beta values to minimize the sum of
squared differences between the actual binary Y values
and the expected Y values,
which again, are continuous numerical values
equal to the linear combination of X variables.
Once the beta coefficients are estimated as before,
we can substitute in the estimated beta values
Beta hat to obtain
the predicted or fitted Y values, Y hat.
However, here, the predicted Y's meaning
is different from that in
the regular linear regression model.
Here, the predicted Y is not
the predicted value of the actual Y,
but instead is the estimated value of the expected Y,
which again is equal to the probability of
Y equal to or the probability of success.
Therefore, remember, in linear probability models,
the predicted or fitted Y is
the predicted probability of success.
The advantage of a linear probability model
is its simplicity.
It's easy to estimate, as we already see.
It's also very easy to interpret.
To see this, let's introduce this very important concept,
the so called partial effect
or sometimes also called marginal effect.
This is the same effect that we were most
interested in for regular linear regressions.
It measures how an independent variable
would affect the dependent variable.
More precisely, it measures
by how much one unit change in
one particular explanatory variable
will cause the expected value
of Y to change while
holding all the other X variables unchanged.
So the partial or marginal effect has
the usual Corus variables interpretation.
Mathematically, it's defined as this.
The expected value of Y
taken the partial derivative with respect to
one particular X variable j
gives the partial effect of xj.
Here, this d operator means partial derivative.
Remember this definition, we're going to
use this definition repeatedly later on.
Following our linear probability model specification,
the expected value of Y equals
the linear combination of all X variables.
Taking partial derivative with respect to
XJ will give us the Beta coefficient Beta.
As a result, the coefficient of
a particular X variable directly
equals the partial effect of this X variable.
As we can recall, this property is
exactly the same as what we
have for regular linear regression.
In standard linear regression,
the Beta coefficients also have the direct interpretation
of the marginal effects of
the corresponding X variable on Y.
What's different for linear probability model
here is that the expected value of Y
is actually equal to the probability of Y
equal to one or the probability of success.
Remember, as we have derived here.
Therefore, in linear probability models,
the B coefficient actually measures how
one X variable would affect the probability of success.
In other words, the partial effect actually
measures by how much one unit change in
one particular X variable will change the probability of
success while holding
all the other X variables unchanged.
Despite its simplicity advantage,
linear probability models have some major limitations.
The foremost one, as you may have already thought of,
is that the predicted probability of
success could go out of the valid range 0-1.
According to our model specification,
the probability of success is modeled as this.
As we know, a valid probability measure should be 0-1.
However, there is no guarantee that
the linear combination on
the right hand side would always result in a value 0-1.
As we'll see in real examples later,
it does happen that the predicted probability of
success for some observation
can go above one or below zero.
These would be invalid probability measures
and don't really make sense.
What does, for example,
a negative probability mean?
We can only loosely interpret
those observations with the predicted probability of
success being negative as being
extremely unlikely to have Y equal to one,
and those with the predicted probability
of success being greater than one,
as being almost certain to have Y equal to one.
However, these are just
loose interpretations, and conceptually,
probability measures outside of
the range of zero to one are not valid.
Therefore, this is the major drawback
of linear probability models.
The non linear models like
logic and probability models we're going to
introduce later will avoid this problem.
Another limitation of linear proposed models is actually
a common limitation of linear models in
general that we have already
discussed in previous videos.
The partial effect, which is equal to Beta,
stays constant regardless of the value of the X variable.
Again, let's think of
the same example of student performance.
If Y is the binary outcome
indicating whether a student
passed the final exam or not,
and X is the number of hours he
or she has spent in preparing for the exam.
Using a linear probability model,
we would have the marginal effect
of the time spent preparing on
the probability of success in
the exam as always constant.
Is this reasonable?
If a student has spent, say, 10 hours,
then the marginal effect of an additional hour of study
would be very helpful in
increasing his or her chance of passing the exam.
However, if the student has
already spent, say, 100 hours,
then his or her chance of passing
the exam should already be very close to one,
and one additional hour of
study wouldn't really help much.
This would violate
the constant marginal effect assumption.
As we'll introduce later,
non linear models like
logit probability models can properly account for
the fact that marginal effects may
change with the value of X variables.
Generally speaking,
a linear probability model works best in the middle.
It will be a good approximation of the reality when
X variables take values near
the average value of the observed range.
Linear probability models generally don't work
well for extreme X values at either end.
After we have estimated model,
we can evaluate the model fit with our data.
This leads to the so called goodness of fit measure.
The most common goodness of
fit measure is the usual R squared,
which measures how much among the total variation
of Y values in our data can be explained by our model.
Here we can continue to use the usual R squared to
measure the goodness fit of
our linear probability models.
But for binary response models,
because of the binary nature,
there is another simpler and
more intuitive measure that we can use.
This is the so called percent correctly predicted,
or sometimes we simply refer to it
as the prediction accuracy rate.
The idea is very straightforward.
Now that we can predict the outcome
for each observation based on our model,
we can then compare
the predicted outcomes to the actual outcomes
observed in the data because
the outcomes are binary is zero or one.
So we can easily count how many observations outcomes
are correctly predicted and
how many are incorrectly predicted.
And the percentage of
correctly predicted observations among
all observations serves as
a good measure of model performance.
This is the percent correctly
predicted or the prediction accuracy rate.
To calculate this measure,
we need to first predict the outcome
for each observation based on our model.
Record that the outcomes are
binary is 01 success or failure,
but the predicted Y hat,
as we specified here,
is the predicted probability of success.
So how do we get from the predicted probability of
success Y hat to the binary outcome, 01?
We still need one more step.
We need to find a threshold C,
such that if the predicted probability of success
had for a particular observation exceeds that threshold,
we will predict the binary outcome for
that observation as one or a success.
If the predicted probability of success for
an observation is less than that threshold,
we will predict the outcome for
that observation as zero or three.
Now, what threshold should we choose?
The most common choice would be 0.5,
as probability values range 0-1,
so one half is a natural choice for the threshold.
This is also what we will use most of the time.
Sometimes, however, when the probability of
success in our data is either very low or very high,
then one half may not
be the best choice for the threshold.
In such cases, we could use
the actual fraction of
success in the data sample as the threshold.
We could even search for
the threshold value so that it makes the fraction of
the predicted success equal to
the fraction of the actual success in the data sample.
Of course, the last approach
is a bit more complex to implement,
as we need to try different possible threshold values,
predict the outcomes using each threshold,
calculate the predicted fraction of success,
and find the one that
matches the actual fraction of success.
Once we have the predicted outcome available,
we can compare the predicted outcome with
the actual outcome observed
in the data for each observation.
We can construct the so called confusion matrix,
which you may have already been very familiar with.
The concept of confusion matrix
is pretty straightforward.
Basically, we can create a two by
two table to represent different scenarios.
The actual outcome can be either zero or one,
and the predicted outcome can be either zero or one.
So there are four different scenarios.
For some observations, the actual outcome is one,
and they are also predicted as one.
So these are the so called true positives.
For some observations, the actual outcome is zero,
but they are predicted as one.
So these are the so called false positives.
And similarly, we have two negative and false negative.
We just count the number of
observations that are true positive,
false positive, true negative,
and false negative, and fill
the counts into the four cells of the confusion matrix.
As we can see, the counts along
the diagonal of the matrix are those correctly predicted.
So the percent correctly
predicted or the accuracy rate simply
equals the sum of
the diagonal counts divided
by the sum of all four counts,
which is just the total number of
observations in our data sample.
One thing to notice
the overall percent correctly predicted
alone may not be sufficient to
fairly evaluate the performance of a model.
High overall percent correctly predicted does not
necessarily guarantee gold model fit. Why?
Let's look at this simple example.
If this is the confusion matrix from our model,
then does our model perform well?
As we can see, the overall percent
correctly predicted is 90%,
which is equal to 90 plus zero along the diagonal line,
divided by the sum of all four counts, which equals 100.
So 90% accuracy rate sounds not bad for a model.
However, take a closer look at what this model is doing.
It actually is a very lousy model
and simply predicts everything as one.
The reason that it reached
90% overall accuracy rate is
not because the model predicts very accurately,
but because among the original data,
the vast majority of observations are once anyway.
This example hence shows us
that the overall percent correctly
predicted alone is not enough to
fairly evaluate the goodness of fit of a model.
In fact, we also need to check the percent
correctly predicted for each possible outcome.
That is, for each possible actual outcome
or each column in the confusion matrix,
we calculate the accuracy rate.
Divide the count of correct predictions by
the total count of
observations with that particular outcome.
If we do so for this example,
then the accuracy rate for Y equal to one is 100,
but the accuracy rate for Y equal to zero is 0%.
So apparently, this is not a good model at all.
Generally speaking, a good model should be able to
predict the least likely outcome also reasonably well.
Something important to keep in mind. All right.
These are all we want to talk
about for linear probability models.
A quick summary.
As the simplest model for binary response problems,
linear probability models serve as
a nice transition from linear models to nonlinear models.
We discussed its setup and how to estimate it.
We also discussed the interpretation of
Beta coefficients in a linear probability model,
which is equal to the marginal effect of
an X variable on the probability of success.
We also pointed out
the major limitations of
linear probability models, namely,
the predicted probability of success may
go out of the valid range of zero to one,
and the marginal effects remain constant.
Finally, we introduced
an intuitive measure of goodness of
fit by utilizing the binary nature
of the response variable,
namely the percent correctly
predicted or the prediction accuracy rate,
which we can easily calculate by
constructing the confusion matrix.
Okay, that's all for this video.
Hope you find it helpful. Thanks for watching.