>> In the previous video,
we introduced binary response problems and
discussed linear probability model in great detail.
Linear probability models tackle
binary response problems following
the linear regression framework.
So in essence, it is still one type of linear models.
Linear probability model hence serves as
a good transition from
linear models to non-linear models.
In this video, we are going to introduce
a non-linear model framework to
explicitly model binary response problems.
The framework is called latent variable models.
Depending on the different assumptions
about the ton distribution,
we can have different models,
such as logit and probit models,
as you may be already familiar with.
As we'll see, these non-linear models are able to
address some of the main limitations of linear models,
such as the predated probability
of a success going out of
the valid range of 0-1 and
the marginal effects remaining constant.
Let's get started. We will
start with the latent variable
model framework and show that
both the logit and the probit models can be derived from
the same latent variable model framework and
the different assumptions about
the errors in distribution.
We then introduce how to estimate
logit or probit models using
maximum likelihood estimation or MLE.
We then quickly talk about model performance evaluation.
Finally, as usual, we'll discuss the interpretation of
logit or probit model coefficients
and focus on partial effects in particular,
which now have different formulation and
properties from those of linear probability models.
Let's first introduce the latent variable model,
which is a general modeling framework
applicable to binary response problems,
and it will lead to the familiar logit and probit models.
This is the setup of latent variable model.
We have this y-star,
which is the latent dependent variable.
As its name suggests,
y-star is not
the actual dependent variable or observed in the data.
Instead, y-star is an artificial variable,
that is not observable at all.
You can sync of it as imaginary or hypothetical.
It represents the cumulative effects that
would eventually determine the observed actual outcome.
We model the latent y-star
following the usual linear regression structure.
Notice that y-star takes continuous numerical values,
and it is modeled as linearly dependent on a set of
independent variables or x variables plus an error term,
which has the usual meanings.
The error term is an unobserved random variable,
assumed to follow a certain distribution.
Actually, different distribution of the error term,
will lead to different types of models,
as we'll see in a minute.
Now, the actual outcome as observed in the data,
which is a binary for binary response problems
is assumed to be determined by the latent y-star.
If y-star is greater than 0,
then the observed binary outcome will be 1.
If y-star is less than equal to 0,
then the observe the binary outcome will be 0.
Having set up the latent variable model framework,
we cannot derive the probability
of observing the actual outcomes.
Before getting to the details, to simplify notations.
Sometimes we will use this expression X Beta
to represent this entire linear combination
of x's and Beta's.
This is actually a vector expression.
The X without subscripts represents
a raw vector that consists of
all x variables in the model plus 1 for the intercept.
Beta without subscripts represents
a colon vector that consists of all Beta coefficients.
And X*Beta is a vector multiplication,
which essentially is the
cross-product of all the elements of the two vectors.
If you are not familiar with vector
or matrix notation or calculation,
you can simply think of X Beta as a sand
for Beta_0+Beta_1*x+1+Beta_2*x_2 plus all
the way two Beta_k*x_k.
Now, we can formally derive the probability of observing
the actual outcome y = 1
based on the latent variable model we have set up.
The probability of the actual y = 1 is equivalent to
the probability of the latter y-star
being greater than 0,
according to the latent variable model definition,
which is further equal to the probability of
X Beta plus the errr term being greater than 0.
For this step, we just substitute in
the specification of y-star according to our model.
Notice that the error term is a random variable.
X values are given by
the data observation and Beta are constant coefficients.
So X Beta are deterministic.
We can rewrite this probability,
centering around the random variable,
the error term e. So it's equal to
the probability of e being greater than -X Beta.
Now, how should we further derive this probability?
It's the probability of this focal random variable e,
taking values greater than a certain given value.
This probability depends on
the distribution of e, the error term.
Different assumptions about the error term distribution
will lead to different expressions
of the probability of success,
hence resulting different models.
Here, let's first derive
the probability of success in a general form.
Suppose the distribution of
the error term can be defined by that G function,
which is the cumulative distribution function
or the cdf of the error term distribution.
If you are not familiar with the concept of cdf,
be sure to look it up and understand it well.
This is a very important concept whenever we
need to describe the distribution of a random variable,
and we will use this concept repeatedly.
Simply put, the cdf of a random variable e defines
the probability of this random variable
being less than a given value.
Recall as we introduced previously,
this is actually the p function
in R for a given distribution.
As an analogy we used before.
This is like giving the function and SAT or GIE score.
This cdf function will tell you
what percentage of all scores
are below this particular score.
Now, back to the derivation.
Given the cdf G function,
we can write this probability as 1-G(-X Beta).
Because G(-X Beta) measures
the probability of e being less than or equal to -X Beta.
The probability of e being greater than -X Beta is
equal to 1-G(-X Beta).
Finally, we can further simplify this expression
by using the symmetric nature
of the error term distribution.
Usually, we'll pick some distribution that is
symmetric about 0 as the error term distribution.
If the distribution is symmetric about 0,
then the probability of error term
being greater than -X Beta
is equal to the probability of
error term being less than +X Beta,
which can be written as G(X Beta).
Therefore, we have derived the probability of
success based on
the latent variable model in a general form.
The probability of the actual y being
1 is equal to G(X Beta).
Where G is the cumulative distribution function,
cdf of the error term distribution.
You may forget all the detailed derivation here,
but be sure to remember this final expression.
This is the foundation of logit and probit models,
as we'll explain next.
Now, contrast the probability of success derived
here with that from the linear probability model.
In linear probability models,
the probability of success is simply modeled as X Beta,
the linear combination of
x variables and Beta coefficients.
So the probability of success
is linear in Beta coefficients.
But here, in latent variable models,
the probability of success is modeled as G(X Beta),
where G is a non-linear function.
Therefore, the probability of success
is no longer linear in Beta coefficients.
As a result, we officially
enter the realm of non-linear models.
Another difference to notice is
that in linear probability models,
the probability of success is
the linear combination of X and Beta.
So there is no guarantee that it
will always fall between 0-1.
However, here, in latent variable models,
the probability of success is
equal to the cdf function value,
which by definition, is a probability measure,
and is hence always between 0-1.
Therefore, the non-linear latent variable models
solve a major problem of linear probability models.
This is the modeling framework for
the non-linear binary response
models we're going to introduce.
Now, the next natural question is,
what distribution of the error term should we assume,
and what functional form should this G function take?
This will lead to
the two non-linear binary response models
that we are familiar with.
If we assume the error term
follows the standard logistic distribution,
then the model we have is the logit model.
If instead, we assume the error term
follows the standard normal distribution,
then the model we have is the probit model.
So essentially, these two models originate from
the same modeling framework by
assuming different distributions of the error term.
For the normal distribution,
we are all very familiar with.
The standard normal distribution has mean
0 and standard deviation 1.
This is the familiar PDF,
the probability density function
of a standard normal distribution.
Again, same as cdf,
pdf is another important concept for
describing the distribution of any random variable.
Pdf function, which has nothing to do with Adobe,
is that probability density function,
oftentimes simply refer to as the density function.
It is the derivative of the cdf function and is
represented as the d function
in R for a given distribution,
as we introduced previously.
The pdf function of a normal distribution can
be depicted as the familiar bell curve,
as I illustrated here using the dotted curve.
A higher point on the curve means that
the random variable is more
likely to take the corresponding x value
and a lower point on the curve means that
the random variable is less likely
to take the corresponding x value.
Therefore, the bell curve indicates that
a normally distributed random variable is likely to take
values around the mean and less likely
to take extreme values at either end of the domain.
Then how about logistic distribution?
The solely the curve here depicts
the density function of a standard logistic distribution.
As we can see, logistical distribution is
actually very similar to the normal distribution.
Its density function also
follows the usual bell shaped curve.
Compared to a normal distribution,
logistic distribution is just a bit fatter.
It has the so called fatter tails,
meaning that the probability mass
is less concentrated in the middle around the mean,
but it's more spread towards the two ends.
>> Now that logistic distribution
is very similar to a normal distribution.
Then, why don't we simply
use the familiar normal distribution?
But instead introduce this new distribution?
A major advantage of logistic distribution is that it has
very neat close-form expressions
for both the CDF and the PDF.
The CDF function of a standard logistic distribution is
defined as this. As we can see.
It takes a very neat functional form..
E is the usual exponential function.
X is the exponent.
So the probability of the focal random variable,
taking values less than or equal to x is equal
to e^x / (1+e^x).
This logistic CDF function can be depicted as this,
the solid curve in this plot.
Notice that for a function
to be a value the CDF function,
it has to be non-decreasing and range from 0-1.
Let's quickly check the definition of
the logistic CDF function to
understand why it is a valued distribution.
Now, as x goes to positive infinity,
what value does g(x) go to?
When x goes to positive infinity,
e^x goes to infinity,
and 1+e^x is also infinity.
And here, one can be pretty much ignored.
So e^x / (1+e^x)=1.
So as x goes to positive infinity,
g(x) goes to one.
Now, as x goes to negative infinity,
what value does g(x) go to?
Notice that when x goes to negative infinity,
e^x goes to zero.
So 0 /(1+0)=0.
Therefore, as x goes to negative infinity,
g(x) goes to zero.
Now, is g(x) non decreasing in x?
Yes. To see this,
we can divide both the numerator and
the denominator by e^x.
So g(x)=1/1/e^x+1.
E^x is increasing in x.
So 1/e^x is decreasing in x
and 1/1/e^x+1 is increasing in x.
Therefore, g(x) is increasing in x.
Therefore, we can conclude that the logistic CDF,
g(x) is increasing in x and the range from 0-1.
Therefore, it is indeed a valid probability distribution.
Taking derivative of the CDF function with respect to x,
we get the PDF,
the probability density function
of the logistic distribution,
which also takes a neat closed-form expression.
And this PDF function follows
the bell shaped curve as
depicted by the solid curve here.
As we can check, the density function of
the largest data distribution is
indeed symmetric about zero.
So g(x)= g(-x) satisfying
the property we assumed in
deriving the general probability of success.
And we can see, having
neat closed-form expressions for both the CDF and
the PDF functions is
a very favorable mathematical property
of the largest data distribution.
And is what makes it the most popular
model specification for binary response promise.
Recall as we just derived,
the probability of y=1 or the probability of
success can be derived as equal to g(xβ),
where g is the CDF function of the error term.
Therefore, if we assume
the error term follows the logistic distribution,
then the g function simply takes this form.
Therefore, g(xβ) =
e^(xβ) / (1+e^(xβ)).
Recall xβ is just the shorthand of
the linear combination of x variables and β coefficients.
So we can further expand the expression as this.
Be sure to remember this expression,
which is the defined expression of a logit model.
It defines the probability
of y=1 or the probability of a success for
a binary response model under the assumption
that the error term follows a logistic distribution.
Actually, some textbooks may
start introducing the logit model,
also called the logistic regression,
directly from this defining formula.
Here, we start a discussion from
the general framework so that you can better
understand where the logit model comes from and where it
stands within
the whole binary response modeling framework.
Compared to the logistic distribution,
which leads to the logit model,
the normal distribution, which leads to the probit model.
Although more commonly seen in terms of
the distribution itself is
actually less preferable in
terms of its mathematical properties.
This is because a normal distribution only
has a closed-form expression for the PDF function,
but the CDF function does not have a closed-form.
It can be defined as the integral of the PDF function.
But this integral cannot be explicitly integrated out,
resulting in no closed-form expression
for the CDF function of a normal distribution.
As a result, for a probit model,
the probability of success,
G(Xβ) does not have a closed-form expression,
which is hence less preferable than the logit model.
This is why the logit model or the logistic regression
is the most popular choice for binary response models.
But as we can clearly see,
both logit and probit models
are derived from the same framework,
and the only difference is
the distribution of the error term.
Having understood the setup
of the binary response models,
we can then talk about how to estimate the model.
That is to find the estimated values of
the unknown β coefficients in
logit or probit models based on our data observations.
Notice that because the logit or probit models
are now non linear models.
So we can no longer use the ordinary least
square or the OLS estimation to estimated model.
Instead, the estimation method we
typically use for logit or probit models,
is called the maximum likelihood estimation or MLE.
The idea of MLE is to
first derive the so called likelihood function,
which simply put is the likelihood or probability of
observing the actual outcome for
each data observation as we have in our data set.
For each observation I,
if the outcome y_1=1,
then it's a success,
and the probability of observing a success given
all x variable values of this observation is g(xβ).
Similarly, for those observations
where the outcome is zero,
then the probability of observing a failure is 1- g(xβ).
The likelihood function is simply the product of
the likelihood of observing
the outcome of each data observation,
which consists of the product of
the likelihood of all success observations,
multiplied by the product of
the likelihood of all failure observations.
Notice that this big Pi notation
means product or multiplication.
Now, inside this likelihood function,
all x variable values and
the success failure outcomes are known.
And the only unknowns are those β coefficients.
Therefore, the likelihood function is
actually a function of the β coefficients.
The MLE estimation method is to search for the set of
β coefficient values that
will maximize the likelihood function.
And this set of β values is
the MLE estimator of the β coefficients.
Intuitively, we'd like to find
the β coefficient values that will make
the probability of success as close to one as possible,
for those data observations,
whose actual outcome is indeed one,
and make the probability of
success as close to zero as possible,
for those data observations,
whose actual outcome is zero.
Notice that unlike OLS estimation,
where we can explicitly derive the formula
for the β estimators in linear regression.
Here, the MLE estimators for
binary response models no longer have
explicit formula due to its non linear nature.
Instead, we'll need to rely on
numerical search routine to find the optimal values.
Fortunately, we have well developed,
easy to use numerical optimization routines that
can help us quickly find
the solution to this optimization problem,
as we'll see in the R demonstration later.
After we have estimated the model and
obtained the coefficient estimates, as usual,
we can move on to evaluate
the model performance by computing
the goodness of fit measures to
measure how well the model fits the data.
We can use the usual R-Squared.
But because the models are estimated by MLE,
the type of more commonly used goodness of
fit measures is
the so called Information Criterion Measures,
namely AIC and BIC,
Akaike Information Criterion and
the Bayesian Information Criteria.
Many of you may have already heard of these measures.
For the sake of time, I'll
skip the details of them for now.
We'll explain more about
them once we have a chance later.
Because of the nature of binary responses,
we can also evaluate the model performance by computing
the percent correctly predicted
or the prediction accuracy rate,
just as we did with linear probability models.
For each observation, we can predict
the binary outcome based on the estimated model.
Just as with linear probability models,
we first predict the probability
of success for each observation.
If the predicted probability of success
is greater than or equal to a certain threshold,
we predict the outcome for
this observation as a success or one.
If the predicted probability of
success is less than the threshold,
then we predict the outcome for
this observation as a failure or zero.
What's different here is that the
predicted the probability of success in
the non linear models is
not the linear combination of xβ,
but instead the non linear function, g(xβ).
Same as before. We also need to choose the threshold
C. As we discussed with linear probability models,
we have different options in choosing the threshold.
>> We can simply use one-half as the threshold.
We could also consider
other alternatives as we discussed previously.
Then we can further construct
the confusion matrix as usual,
and calculate the percent correctly predicted for
the overall data and for
each possible outcome separately.
Again, a good model needs to be able to
predict the least likely outcome well.
As we can see, this part of
model evaluation is pretty much the
same as what we have talked
about for linear probability models.
Next, another important issue as usual,
how can we interpret the model estimation results?
What do the values of Beta coefficients mean?
Notice that unlike linear regression,
where the Beta coefficients directly equal
the marginal effects of X variables on Y.
In the non-linear models,
the Beta coefficient values no
longer have clear direct interpretation.
If we really want to interpret
the direct meaning of Beta coefficients in logit models,
we could interpret them this way
in terms of the so called log-odds,
as some of you may have heard of.
Here is how it can be derived.
As we just explained, in logit models,
the probability of success can be derived as this.
Then some reorganization and the simple algebra,
we can rewrite the probability of success divided by
one minus the probability of
success as equal to e^X Beta.
Then take the logarithm on both sides of the equation.
We have X Beta equal to log of
the probability of success over
one minus the probability of success.
Notice that this ratio,
the probability of success
over one minus the probability of success,
is the ratio between the probability of
success and the probability of failure,
because one minus the probability of
success equals the probability of failure.
This ratio is called the odds,
originating from horse-racing and the betting.
As a result, as we have derived,
in logit models, X Beta is equal to the log of odds.
Therefore, what a Beta coefficient
represents is how much change to
the log of odds will be caused
by one unit increase in an X variable.
This is the direct interpretation
of Beta coefficients in logit models,
however, as I mentioned,
such an interpretation is not
really very clear or meaningful in my opinion,
especially when compared to
the clear direct interpretation of
Beta coefficients in linear models.
What's more important for model interpretation is still
the partial effects or marginal effects of X variables,
that is, how much one unit change in an X variable
will cause the expected value
of the Y variable to change.
The definition is the same as that in linear models,
but as we'll see, the expression of
partial effects in non-linear models will be different.
No longer equal to the Beta coefficient alone.
To derive the partial effects in binary response models,
let's start from the definition.
The expected value of y,
which is equal to the probability of
success is equal to G(X Beta),
where G is the CDF function
of the error term, which again,
follows the logistic distribution for
logit models and
the normal distribution for probit models.
Now, take a partial derivative of the expected value of
Y with respect to a particular X variable, xj.
Applying the chain rule of partial derivative,
it is equal to g(X Beta)*Beta j,
where little g is the PDF,
the density function of the error term.
So this result is very
important and be sure to remember this expression.
The partial effect of
an X variable in binary response models
is equal to the Beta coefficient times a factor,
which is equal to the density function of the error term
evaluated at the values of
X variables for a particular observation.
This formula is actually very informative
and has several profound implications.
First, in non-linear binary response models,
the partial effects no longer
equal the Beta coefficients themselves.
Instead, we need to multiply
the Beta coefficients with
a factor to arrive at the partial effects.
This factor is the PDF or the density function of
the error term evaluated at a given X variable values.
Again, that's the density function
of logistic distribution for
logit models and the density function of
normal distributions for probit models.
Because the density function is always positive,
so the partial effects do
share the same sign as the Beta coefficient.
If a Beta coefficient is positive,
then the partial effects of
the corresponding X variable is
also positive and vice versa,
however, the magnitude of the Beta coefficient no
longer has direct interpretation of that partial effect.
Second, because the multiplicative factor,
G(X Beta) contains the value of X variables,
the partial effect of a particular X variable
actually change with the values of all X variables.
This is a very important property,
which mitigates one major limitation
of linear probability models,
where the partial effects are always constant,
as we pointed out previously.
Now, think about this.
When will the partial effect of
a particular X variable be the greatest?
Because Beta j is constant,
so the partial effect will be the largest
when g(X Beta) is the largest,
because g is the density function of the error term,
which follows the usual bell curve.
So g(X Beta) will be the largest
when X Beta is around the mean, which is zero.
Therefore, the partial effects will be the
largest when X Beta is around zero.
Similarly, the partial effects will be the weakest
when G(X Beta) is the smallest,
which is when X Beta picks extreme values,
either very large or very small.
Now, think, is such a pattern reasonable?
Let's go back to our previous example where the outcome Y
is whether a student succeeds in an exam or not,
and the X variable is the amount of
time he or she spent in preparing for the exam?
When will the partial effect be the
greatest or when will one additional hour of
study be the most rewarding in terms
of increasing the probability of success in the exam?
It should be when the student has
spent some moderate amount of time.
In contrast, if the student
has already spent too much time of study,
one additional hour won't be very rewarding
because he or she is most
likely to succeed in the exam regardless.
If the student hasn't
spent much time in preparing at all,
then one additional hour won't be very rewarding either,
because most likely he or she is going to fail
the exam still, therefore,
the partial effects will be small when
the X variables value is
either very large or very small,
whereas the partial effects will be
large when the X variables value is in the middle.
Such a changing pattern of partial effects as
X variables value changes is exactly
what's captured by the logit or probit models.
In fact, as we can see,
in logit or probit models,
the probability of success,
which equals the CDF function,
takes the S shape as X Beta increases.
In other words, the probability of success increases at
a very slow pace when x is either too large or too small.
But the probability of success increases at
a very fast pace or
a very steep slope when X is around the middle.
Such an S shape, which is absent in linear models is
nicely captured by the non-linear binary response models
in a very natural way.
The third important implication is that,
because partial effects equal that
Beta coefficient multiplied by the PDF term,
which is different across different models, therefore,
the Beta coefficient in
different models are not directly comparable.
For example, the Beta coefficients estimated from
the logit and the probit models
are not comparable to each other.
In other words, they are measuring different things,
and do not have the same meanings.
Instead, they need to be scaled by the PDF factor,
which follows different distributions for logit versus
probit models in order to
restore the same partial effects.
However, the partial effects themselves have
the same definition and
the meanings across different models,
and can therefore, be comparable
across logit versus probit models.
These are all we want to talk about
for non-linear binary response models.
We started with
the general latent variable model framework,
and derived the logit and
the probit models as special cases of
this general framework by assuming
different probability distributions for the error term.
We then discussed how to estimate
logit or probit models
using maximum likelihood estimation,
and how to evaluate
the model performance using the usual approach.
In particular, we discussed in detail how to
interpret the Beta coefficients
in these non-linear models,
which have more complex yet richer implications.
Hope you found that the content in this video helpful.
That's all for this video. Thanks for watching.