>> In this video, we're going to demonstrate how
to implement the important concepts related
to discrete choice models in R. We
will start with how to
organize data for discrete choice models,
and then estimate a discrete choice model
and interpret the coefficient estimates.
Based on the estimation results,
we'll evaluate the choice probabilities
of different alternatives and finally,
demonstrate how to evaluate
marginal effects for a certain variable of interest.
As usual, this demonstration will give you
a concrete sense of the theoretical concepts we have
explained in the previous videos and help you better
understand this relatively more complex model framework.
Let's get started. The dataset
we're going to work on for this demonstration
is the heating data.
The original dataset was put together by
Professor Kenneth Train from UC Berkeley,
whose book titled
Discrete Choice Methods with Simulation is
a classic piece for anyone who is
interested in learning discrete choice models in depths,
which I highly recommend.
The data set is also included in the M logit package,
which we're going to use to fit multinomial logit models.
I have extracted a simplified version of
the original dataset and
saved the clean data in a CSV file.
We will use this data file directly.
As we see here, the data sample consists
of 900 single family houses
in California that were newly
built and already had central air conditioning.
The house IDs are indicated in this chid column,
which stands for choice ID.
The choice of interest is the heating systems.
Five types of heating systems are considered here.
Gas central, gas by room,
electric central, electric by room, and heat pump.
These are the five alternatives in
the choice set facing each house owner.
For each house, we calculated
the installation costs denoted as IC,
and the annual operating costs denoted as
OC for each of the five heating systems.
These costs were calculated
based on the characteristics of the house,
the price of gas,
and the electricitys in
the house location and
the weather conditions in the area.
The actual choice of the heating system
by each house owner
is recorded as indicated by depvar here,
which stands for dependent variable.
It uses binary indicators
to indicate the choice decision.
The heating system alternative
eventually chosen is indicated as one,
the other alternatives that were not
chosen are indicated as zero.
We'd like to examine how the costs of
each heating system alternative would affect
the choice probabilities of all these options.
Before we proceed, I'd like to quickly mention
the two different formats of
storing data for discrete choice problems.
For the exactly same information,
there is actually another way of storing the data,
which takes fewer roles,
but without losing any information at all.
Now, think, how would you do that?
In the current format,
each individual house occupies
multiple rows with each row
corresponding to one heating system alternative.
This way, we can easily save
the information for those alternative specific variables,
like the installation costs and operating costs here,
which are different for different heating systems.
This type of format is called
the long format because
there are multiple rows for each individual.
So the data sheet is very long.
Instead, we can save the data in
a different format where
each individual house only occupies one row.
We will need to create multiple variables for
each alternative specific variable
to store the different values for different alternatives.
The data format will look like this.
We need to create five separate variables
for the IC variable,
and the name them properly as IC dot GC, IC dot GR,
IC dot EC, IC dot ER,
and IC dot HP to
represent the installation costs for gas central,
gas by room, electrical central,
electric by room, and the heat pump respectively.
We will need to do the same for the OC variable as well.
This type of format is called
the wide format because we now have a lot more columns.
So the dataset is wider.
Notice that if we have
some individual specific
but alternative invariant variables,
such as the demographic variables.
In the wide format, these variables
only need to appear once for each individual.
Whereas in the long format,
these variables need to appear multiple times for
each individual with the same value repeatedly.
Therefore, the wide format is
a more efficient way of data storage if
we have many individual specific
yet alternative invariant variables.
The downside of the wide format is, of course,
the greater number of columns or
variables with usually cumbersome variable names,
which are generally less efficient to handle.
Also notice that the choice decisions are stored
differently for the wide format versus the long format.
The R package we're going to use can import
data in both the long and the wide format.
For our exercises, we'll simply use the long format
as we don't have any individual
specific but alternative invariant variables.
Let's start working on the R code now.
In order to fit multinomial logit discrete choice models,
we need to use some external R package.
Again, these are third party packages
developed and shared by
different people around the world.
The package we're going to use is called mlogit,
which stands for multinomial logit.
Again, if this is the first time you've
ever used this package on your computer,
you need to first download and install it
using the install dot package statement.
Once the package is installed,
you need to use the library statement
to load it into the current R session.
Again, installation needs to be
done only once on each computer,
but you need to load the package
every time you start a new R session.
As usual, we read
dot CSV function to read
in the data stored in the CSV file.
Again, be sure to save the data under
the working directory of R studio,
or you need to explicitly
specify the full directory as part of the file name.
Read dot CSV function sets header to be true by default,
so we don't really need to
specify the header option explicitly.
Save the imported data into
a data frame variable named my data.
To fit a multinomial logit model
using the mlogit package,
we need to first convert the data
into an object recognizable by the package.
To do so, we can use the mlogit dot data function.
There are a series of arguments we need to
specify properly in order to use this function.
The first argument is that data
frame where the data are saved.
The shape argument specifies
that format of the original data.
Because our data was stored in the long format,
so we specify long here.
For wide format data,
just specify wide for that shape argument.
The choice argument designate which variable
in the original data stores the choice decisions.
In our data, the depvar variable stores
the choice decisions,
so we set that as the choice variable.
The alt var argument specifies which variable
in the original data stores
the names of the alternatives.
In our data, that is the alt variable.
So we specify it here.
Finally, the chid var argument
specifies which variable stores the choice ID,
which is the identifier
for each so called choice situation.
For our applications, you can simply think of
each choice situation as each individual.
So here, each choice ID is
the ID for each individual house,
which is stored in this chid variable,
as we specify so here.
Having specified all necessary arguments,
we can then call the mlogit dot data function
and save the created data object into a variable.
We can use the head function to quickly
show the first 10 rows of the data.
Notice that the format of
the mlogit dot data function output is the long format.
So the first 10 rows contains
the data for the first two houses,
each of which occupies
five rows for the five alternatives.
Having the data properly imported and converted,
we are now ready to apply
the multinomial logit model to our data.
To estimate a multinomial logit model,
we can use the mlogit function.
The syntax is similar to what
we used for linear regressions.
The model is specified as
the dependent variable tilled
the list of independent variables.
Notice that in our simple cases,
where there only involve
individual and alternative specific variables,
and we only consider common or generic coefficients.
The independent variables can be specified as usual.
Just list each variables
name and connect them by the plus sign.
In more complex full model specification,
as we explained in the previous videos.
We need to separate the independent variables
into different parts using the pipe sine here.
I'll leave the more complex model specification
to those who are interested to explore on your own.
As usual, specify the data
object and save the output to a variable.
Run the R statement.
As we can see, the estimation of
a multinomial logit model is completed almost in no time.
As we said previously,
although the likelihood functions of
multinomial logit models may seem complex,
they are actually globally concave.
So the estimation can be done very quickly,
even if there are a lot of
variables and the data size is large.
The estimation results can be interpreted in
pretty much the same way as those of linear regressions.
Let's take a quick look at the coefficient table.
Pay attention to the first four rows. What are they?
They are the intercepts for each alternative,
the so called alternative specific intercepts.
Notice how many of them do we have?
Four. There are five heating system alternatives,
but we only have j minus one,
which is equal to four alternative specific intercepts.
And one alternative is chosen as the baseline,
and its intercept is normalize to zero.
So which one is normalized to zero?
Whichever is missing here.
Actually, electric central or EC is
chosen as the baseline and
its intercept is normalized to zero here.
And all these intercepts
actually measure the average utility
from each alternative in
comparison with the baseline alternative.
So be careful with the identification constraints
and the interpretations.
Now, what do these positive coefficients mean?
They mean compare to the baseline alternative,
which is electric central.
These two heating options generate
higher utilities on average given everything else equal.
In contrast, these two negative coefficients indicate
these two heating options generate
lower utilities on average
compared to the baseline alternative.
Also, notice that for IC and OC,
these two variables are both
individual and alternative specific,
and we only assign
a common generic coefficient in front of each of them.
So we only have
one coefficient in front of each of these two variables.
Notice that the coefficients are negative,
meaning that as the installation
or operating costs increase,
the utility from any of
the heating options will decrease, which makes sense.
Having estimated that multinomial logit model,
we can perform some post estimation analysis.
We can first calculate that predict
that choice probability of
each alternative for each individual.
Recall that the formula to
calculate the choice probability is equal to
this with Vij equal to this.
We could manually calculate that choice probability,
by substituting the coefficient estimates and
the x variable values for
each individual and the alternative.
Since our basic model doesn't have many coefficients,
and calculation isn't complex
at all and it's totally doable.
I encourage you to do so on your own,
just to deepen your understanding
of this very important concept.
Once you have obtained
the calculated choice probabilities
by manual calculation,
you can easily double check
your results with the output from the R function.
We can easily calculate
the choice probabilities using the fitted function.
Just as we calculated the fitted y in linear regression
and the predicated probability of
success in binary response models.
We first pass in
the estimation result of the multinomial logit model.
Notice that if we want to obtain
the choice probabilities of all alternatives,
we will need to specify outcome as equal to force.
By default, outcome is set to be true,
which means the function will
only return the choice probability
of the alternative actually
being chosen by each individual.
So be sure to set the outcome argument properly
to obtain the choice probabilities of all alternatives.
If we just execute this fitted function like that,
it will display the choice probabilities
of all 900 individuals in our data.
We don't want to print out so many roles.
So as an illustration,
let's only display the first several individuals,
so we can use the head function as usual.
As we can see, it displays
the predicated choice probability
of each heating option for
the first six households in our data.
Notice that these values are all probability measures,
so they are between 0-1.
And if we add up
all the choice probabilities of each individual,
that is along each row,
they should add up to one as we can easily verify.
As we can see, in general,
the gas central heating option
has the highest probability of being chosen,
which is consistent with what we observe in the data.
Next, we'd like to calculate the marginal effects of
a particular independent variable to see
how much it will affect the choice probability.
Recall that, as we explained in the previous video.
In discrete choice models,
marginal effects are in fact j by j measures.
We need to specify which alternatives
x variable changes and which
alternatives choice probability will be affected.
Also, when measuring marginal effects,
we need to specify the values of all x variables.
There are usually several options.
One is to use a particular individuals x variables.
So we'll be calculating
the marginal effects specific
to this particular individual.
Another common approach is to use
the mean values of
all x variables among all individuals in the data.
Then we will be calculating on average or for
an average individual as
the representative of all individuals in the data.
What are the marginal effects of interest.
Here, let's use the second approach.
Let's first calculate the average values
of the two independent variables,
IC and OC across all individuals in the data.
Notice that IC and OC are alternative specific variables.
So they take different values for different alternatives.
So for each of the two variables,
we actually have five different average values.
Now, notice that given our data structure,
how can we calculate the average values of IC and OC?
Can we simply calculate that colon average as usual?
The answer is clearly no.
What we want is the average IC value
for the EC alternative across all individuals,
and the average IC value for
the ER alternative across all individuals,
and so on and so forth.
So we want to calculate the average value of
each x variable by a particular alternative.
In order to do so,
we need to use the T applied function.
The T applied function allows us to apply
a particular function to
a particular variable by another variable.
Here, we apply the mean function to the IC variable of
the heating data by
each different value of the alternative variable.
Save the output to other variable.
We can quickly call this variable to check its values.
As we can see, it contains five different values,
which are the average IC values for each of
the five heating options
across all individuals in our data.
We can do the same for the OC variable.
Use that T applied function to apply the mean function to
the OC variable by
each different value of the alt variable.
As we can quickly check,
it also contains five different values,
which are the average OC values for each of
the five heating options
across all individuals in our data.
So be careful with how we obtain
alternative specific average in long formatted data.
Notice that if the data
were stored in the wide format instead,
then calculating the alternative specific average
would be very simple.
We can simply calculate
that colon average as usual in this case.
So be sure to understand the difference.
Having obtained the alternative specific average
for the two independent variables,
we need to create a data frame to store these values
because that's what the next function will
need to calculate the marginal effects.
We can create the data frame by
using the data dot frame function
and specify the two variable names
explicitly and then pass in the values.
As we can check, the data frame created looks like this.
Five rows for the five alternatives,
and the two columns for the two x variables.
Now, we are ready to calculate the marginal effects.
The function we can use is the effects function.
We will first pass in
the estimation results of the multinomial
logit model then we specify the variable of interest,
whose marginal effects we would like to calculate.
Recall that in discrete choice models,
we will focus on a particular independent variable
of interest when calculating the marginal effects,
and the effects we'll get will
be a j by j matrix, as we'll see.
Here, let's focus on
the operating costs of heating systems.
So we'll specify the co variate of interest as OC.
Finally, specify the values of
the x variables at which
we will evaluate the marginal effects.
These values have already been
saved in the data frame we just created.
Once we have all this information needed,
we can run the effects function,
and what we'll get will be a j by j matrix.
As we can see, each cell in this j by
j matrix represents the marginal effect if
a particular alternatives focal x variable
change on the choice probability
of the corresponding alternative.
For example, the first row
and the first column indicates,
if the operating cost of
the electric central heating system
increases by one unit,
the probability of the electrical central option
being chosen will decrease
by this much, about 0.044%.
Notice that the sign is negative, which makes sense.
As the cost of a particular heating option increases,
it becomes less attractive,
and hence, its probability of being chosen will decrease.
As we said, the diagonal cells
measure the self marginal effects,
that is the effect on the choice probability of
the same alternative if its own attribute change.
In contrast, the off diagonal cells
represent the cross marginal effect,
that is the effect on
the choice probability of another alternative,
if one alternatives attribute change.
For example, the third row and the fourth column
indicates if the operating cost of
the gas central heating system increases by one unit,
the probability of the gas by room option being chosen
will increase by this much, about 0.0647%.
Again, notice the sign is
positive, which also makes sense.
As the cost of one alternative increases,
the probability of competing alternatives
being chosen should increase as a result.
So be sure to understand how to
interpret the marginal effect matrix.
Finally, one last point.
Notice that the matrix we get here is
symmetric meaning that the value
at row i column j is
equal to the value at row j column i.
Should this always be the case?
Actually, not necessarily.
If we look at the formula of cross marginal effects,
as we can see, it depends on
the Beta coefficient for each alternative.
In our simple model specification,
where we only consider
a common Beta coefficient for all alternatives.
A Beta value is the same for all alternatives.
Therefore, the marginal effect of alternative j and
alternative j prime will be
the same as that of j prime on j,
and as a result, the marginal effect matrix is symmetric.
However, in the most general model specification,
where Beta coefficients are
allowed to be alternative specific,
then it is not necessary for the marginal effect of j on
j prime to be the same as that of j prime on j.
So the marginal effect matrix is
not necessarily always symmetric.
Just something for you to know.
These are all we want to
demonstrate regarding discrete choice models.
We have demonstrated all of
the important concepts on
this topic as introduced in the previous videos.
Hope it can help deepen
your understanding of this a bit complex,
yet very important model framework.
That's all for this video. Thanks for watching.