>> Hello, everyone. Welcome back.
Let's continue our introduction of
non linear econometric models.
Previously, we introduced the binary response models,
where the outcome variable is binary,
that is, taking only two possible values,
either 0 or 1.
In this video, we'd like to extend
the binary response models to allow
the outcome variable to
take more than two possible values.
This lead to the so called discrete choice models.
And one commonly applied form of
discrete choice models is known as
the multinomial logic models.
As we'll see, discrete choice models
enable us to handle problems
with qualitative dependent variables
involving multiple categories,
which naturally account for
a broad class of problems commonly encountered.
We will start with describing
the framework of discrete choice models in general.
And then introduce the setup of multinomial logit model,
by imposing a particular assumption
on the error term distributions.
We will then discuss the connection between
multinomial logit models and
the binary response logic models that we already know.
We'll point out the identification requirements
for discrete choice models.
As usual, we'll discuss how to estimate
discrete choice models, and most importantly,
how to interpret the model estimation results by
focusing on the particularly important concept
of marginal effects.
Now let's get started.
As already mentioned,
this discrete choice problems can be viewed as
an extension of the binary response problems
we discussed previously.
For binary response problems,
the dependent variable or the outcome variable
is binary categorical variable, that is,
to take one of two possible values,
or to choose between two possible categories.
Then, what if we are facing
more than two possible
categories for the outcome variable?
That's where discrete choice models come in.
It extends the number of categories
for the dependent variable to be more than two.
Actually any finite integer values.
In the language of discrete choice models,
we often call the possible categories for
the dependent variable alternatives.
So in discrete choice problems,
each individual chooses one out of multiple alternatives,
whereas binary response problems deal with
choosing one out of only two alternatives.
In this sense, you can also
view the binary response models we have
introduced as a special case of
the more general discrete choice models.
Examples of discrete choice problems are abundant.
A leading example of discrete choice problems
would be brand choices of consumers.
Almost every day, consumers
face the decisions of choosing one brand
out of many options available on
the market for the same type of products.
This is a typical example of discrete choice problems.
That's why discrete choice models are well studied and
widely applied in the fields of economics and marketing,
where understanding and influencing
consumer behaviors is an important theme.
Other examples include the choice
of transportation mode for daily commute.
For example, choosing among driving,
taking buses, riding a bike, et cetera.
Also, choosing a college
or an academic program to attend.
For example, there are many programs
on analytics available.
What made you guys choose the program of gergeorgia Tech?
There must be something great about this program,
so what are the most influential factors?
So these are all examples of discrete choice problems,
where discrete choice models can help
analyze the data and answer many questions of interest.
Before we introduce the details
of discrete choice models,
let's first quickly discuss the properties of
the choice set we typically
require for discrete choice models to work.
Here, the choice set means the set of
alternatives or options
each individual decision maker faces.
First, alternatives in
the choice set are mutually exclusive.
Meaning that an individual can only
choose one alternative out of the choice set.
Second, the choice set is exhaustive,
meaning that all possible alternatives can be
chosen from are already included in the choice set.
As a result of the first two properties,
each individual will need to choose one
and only one alternative out of the choice set.
Third, the number of
alternatives in the choice set is finite.
At a first glance, these requirements
on the choice set might seem pretty
restrictive and hence may limit
the applicability of discrete choice models.
But actually, they are not.
Most restrictions can be
relaxed by some simple transformations.
For example, if in some real applications or
alternatives are not strictly mutually exclusive,
meaning that individuals may
choose two or more alternatives at the same time,
then we can simply create
new alternatives by combining those alternatives
that could be chosen together and add
these combinations as new alternatives to the choice set.
As a result, we can still withhold
the mutually exclusive requirement for the choice set.
Similarly, if we cannot
observe all possible alternatives in our data,
we can simply add an additional alternative that
represents anything else or
the outside option to the choice set,
which could restore the
exhaustive property of the choice set.
Perhaps the real limitation is the third requirement.
That is the number of
alternatives in the choice set needs to be finite.
We hence cannot apply
discrete choice models to
problems with infinite number of options.
In fact, in practice,
it's also hard to estimate
a discrete choice model where
the number of alternatives is too large.
In this sense, discrete choice models
are best suited for problems
where the choice set consists of
a relatively small number of alternatives.
However, even with this restriction,
we may still get around it by
categorizing all possible alternatives into
a few groups and modeling the choice of
groups in place of the large number of alternatives.
So as we can see, with some reasonable transformations,
discrete choice models can have
very general applicability and
hence are widely applied in
various economics and business contexts.
Let's start to introduce
the details of discrete choice model framework.
Discrete choice models will be the most complex among
all models we have introduced in
this module of model-based learning.
I'll show some mathematical expressions
and derivation just to help those
who are interested in learning
the model details better
understand what's inside the box.
But don't worry if you don't
fully understand the meth details.
Be sure to get the big picture and the main ideas.
Remember the key properties and
features of the model and you'll
see how to apply the model to
real applications in our demonstration later.
Discrete choice models are developed based on
the so called random utility model framework,
We model an individual's utility from
choosing a particular alternative j as this.
Here, utility is a commonly used term in economics.
We can think of utility as the value
an individual derives from
choosing a particular alternative.
We use U_ij to represent the utility of individual,
i, choosing alternative, j.
IN discrete choice models,
we need to pay special attention to
the subscripts in the model specification.
Because now we are dealing with two dimensional indices.
We use subscript i to represent different individuals,
which correspond to different observations
in the data sample as usual.
We use subscript j to
represent different alternatives in the choice set,
which correspond to different categories
or qualitative values the outcome variable can take.
Utility ij consists of two parts,
one, deterministic part,
and one, random part.
The deterministic part is denoted as V_ij,
and is sometimes called the representative utility.
It is a function of the variables observed in the data.
Usually, will model V_ij simply as
a linear combination of
x variables and their Beta coefficients,
just as in regular linear regression.
V_ij represents the utility of individual i from choosing
alternative j that can be
explained by the observed attributes in the data.
It's deterministic given the data
and the model coefficients.
The second part is that random error term,
as we often see, denoted by Epsilon_ij.
It represents the overall effects of
unobserved factors that could affect
the utility of individual i from choosing alternative j.
Because its actual value is unobserved,
Epsilon_ij is modeled as
a random variable following
a certain probability distribution.
Notice that while we say
the error term Epsilon is un observed,
what we mean is it is observed to us,
the analysts or the researchers.
But individual i, him or herself,
does observe the actual values of
Epsilon_ij ij's for all alternatives case,
and determines his or her utilities and
makes the choice decision based on these values.
However, because the actual values of
Epsilons are not observed in the data,
we can only treat them as random variables.
So be sure to understand
the correct meaning and
observe the random error terms well.
Now, based on the utilities,
each individual makes the choice among
all alternatives in the choice set by comparing
the utilities from all alternatives and eventually
picks the one offering
the highest utility among all alternatives.
This leads to our definition of the choice probabilities.
The probability of individual i,
eventually choosing alternative j
over all the other alternatives.
P_ij is equal to the probability of utility U_ij being
greater than the utility from
any other alternative U_ik for all k not equal to j.
This definition is pretty straightforward.
Each individual eventually picks
the alternative offering the highest utility.
So if individual i picks alternative j,
then alternative j must deliver
a higher utility than
any other alternatives in the choice set.
We can then substitute in the definition of U.
So the choice probability,
P_ij is equal to the probability of
V_ij+Epsilon_ij being greater than
V_ik+Epsilon_ik for any k not equal to j.
Then we can reorganize the terms.
And this choice probability is hence
equivalent to the probability of
the difference between the error terms being less
than the difference between the representative utilities.
As we can see, given all the variable values in the data,
the probability of each individual ending up choosing
a particular alternative will
depend on the distribution of the error terms.
If we assume the error terms follow
the so called extreme value distribution,
then we'll have the logy model,
as we'll introduce in detail next.
If we assume the error terms follow
the so called multivariate normal distribution,
then we'll have the probit model,
and the more complex distributions
of the error tons will lead
to other more complex models like nested logit,
mixed logit, et cetera.
As an illustration, we'll
focus on the logit model here only.
To differentiate from the logit model
for binary response problems,
we usually refer to the logit model for
discrete choice problems as multinomial logit models,
and the one for binary response problems,
binomial logit models,
or just the logit models by default.
In multinomial logit models,
we assume each error term,
Epsilon_ij, follows an iid extreme value distribution.
Here, iid means independent and identically distributed.
As the name indicates,
we assume each Epsilon_ij follows
an identical distribution and
they are independent from each other.
The extreme value distribution is
one type of probability distribution,
just like any other distribution we are familiar with,
for example, normal distribution,
the logistic distribution.
There are different variations
of extreme value distribution,
and the one we're using is called
type I or Gumbel extreme value distribution.
It's PDF and the CDF functions are defined as these.
As we can see, there are a lot of e's,
which are the exponential functions.
Although the expressions may seem a little bit weird,
the good thing is that both the PD and
the CDF functions of
extreme value distribution have close form expressions.
A very favorable feature in fact.
Now, how does an extreme
value distribution actually look?
This is the plot of
the pdf function of an extreme value distribution.
As we can see, it pretty much follows
the same bell-shaped curve
as the familiar normal distribution.
What's different is that it's slightly
skewed to the right and has slightly fatter tails.
Therefore, extreme value distribution
is not symmetric about 0.
In fact, the expected value of
extreme value distribution is no longer 0.
It's equal to the so called Euler's constant,
which is about 0.5772, slightly above 0.
And the variance of extreme value distribution
equals this constant,
about 1.6, a bit larger than 1.
Despite these differences in theory, practically,
extreme value distribution is empirically
indistinguishable from the usual normal distribution.
So it behaves very
similarly to normal distribution in practice.
Then a question comes naturally.
Why do we bother to introduce this a bit weird looking
new distribution instead of
simply using the usual normal distribution?
Well, just as why we wanted to introduce
the logistic distribution for binary response models.
The extreme value distribution leads to
a very neat close form expression
for the choice probabilities in discrete choice models,
which is a highly desirable analytical property,
and therefore makes it the most
popular choice for discrete choice model specification.
>> Now, let's see how
extreme value distribution can help us
simplify that derivation of
choice probabilities in discrete choice models.
Recall that the probability of individual i
eventually choosing alternative j
over all the other alternatives,
P_ij can be written as this.
The probability of V_ij plus Epsilon_ ij being greater
than V_ik + Epsilon_ ik for any k not equal to j.
To derive the choice probability explicitly,
the trick is to first reorganize the expression by
treating the ariton of
the chosen alternative Epsilon_ ij as given.
So it's equal to the probability of each
Epsilon_ ik being less than Epsilon_ ij +V_ij-V_ik.
Because Epsilon_ ik's are independent from each other.
So this probability simply equals the product of
the probabilities that each
Epsilon_ ik being less than this expression.
As Epsilon_ ik is a random variable,
whose distribution, we know.
This probability is simply defined by
the CDF function of the extreme distribution,
for the probability of
the focal random variable being less than a given value.
And we already have
the CDF function of the extreme value distribution,
which is as this.
So this probability is equal to
this and then take that product.
Now, what's left undetermined is Epsilon_ ij,
which we had treated as if it's given.
But actually, it's also a random variable,
who's realized value we will never know.
Therefore, what we need to do is to take expectation over
this random variable by
integrating its possible values over its distribution,
which leads to this big expression.
Notice that this part is
the PDF or the density function
of extreme value distribution,
as we defined previously here.
Now, this expression defines
the choice probability under
the extreme value distribution assumption.
After some mathematical simplification
through change of variable and integral calculus,
which I'll skip here,
we can simplify this big expression for
the choice probability into a very neat form.
Again, this is all thanks to
the unique distribution form
of extreme value distribution,
which makes such simplification possible.
Now, take a close look at
this final expression and make sense of it.
The probability of individual i eventually
choosing alternative j over all the other alternatives
is equal to the exponential of
the representative utility of the chosen alternative,
V_ij, divided by the sum of
the exponential of
the representative utilities of all alternatives.
To better understand the intuition
behind this expression,
you can ignore the exponential function for now,
which is the output from
the extreme value distribution specification.
So you can think of it as
just some transformation of V_ij,
that is increasing in V_ij.
That the expression of choice probability
essentially says that the probability
of a certain alternative j
being eventually chosen over
all the other alternatives is equal to the ratio of
this chosen alternatives or observe the utility
over the sum of
all alternatives or observe the utilities.
Isn't such a result intuitive and making a lot of sense.
As one alternative becomes more attractive itself,
which is reflected by
its representative utility V_ij being higher.
Then the probability of
this alternative being chosen will increase.
In contrast, if
other competing alternatives become more attractive,
which means the other
V_ik's in the denominator are increased,
then the probability of
the focal alternative being chosen will become smaller.
Moreover, this expression is
guaranteed to be a valid probability measure.
Because it will always be between 0 and 1.
Exponential of V is always positive
so the whole ratio is always greater than zero.
The numerator is always less than the denominator
because the denominator is
the sum which contains the numerator.
Therefore, the ratio is always less than one.
Furthermore, if we add up
the choice probabilities of all alternatives,
what value do they add to?
They add up to one,
as we can quickly verify,
the sum of all numerators will
add up to be the same as the denominator.
Because each individual has to pick one alternative,
the sum of the probabilities of each
of the alternatives being chosen should equal to one,
which is exactly right here.
As we can see, we started with
this theoretically sound model framework
of discrete choices.
We found a particular distribution for the error term,
which practically
resembles the common normal distribution,
but it has very favorable mathematical properties.
Then following rigorous mathematical derivation,
we arrive at
this very neat and very reasonable expression
of choice probability.
To me, this is the magic
of math and the beauty of modeling.
This explains why multinomial logit model is
such a powerful and popular modeling tool
widely applied in various contexts.
Now, take another look at this expression.
Does it look familiar?
In binary response models,
how was the probability of
success in the logit model defined?
It's the exponential of x Beta,
which is just a representative utility V/1 plus
exponential of V. Because
binary response models only involve two alternatives,
and the probability of success is basically
the choice probability of one of the two alternatives.
So if we normalize
the representative utility of
the other alternative to zero and define V
as the difference between the representative utility of
the alternative labeled as
success and that of the other alternative,
then we can derive the probability of success in
the binomial logit model directly from
the choice probability in the multinomial logit model.
Because exponential of 0 = 1.
So the denominator here simply becomes 1 + e^v here.
As we can clearly see,
the binomial logit model in
the binary response framework can be viewed as
a special case of
the multinomial logit model
in the discrete choice framework.
In fact, if we define
a new random variable as a difference between
two error terms that follow
IID extreme value distribution, say Epsilon star.
Then as we can mathematically prove,
this new random variable Epsilon star
follows exactly the logistic distribution,
which is the error terms distribution for
the binomial logit model
as we defined in the previous topic.
In this sense, we can view the binomial logit model as
a discrete choice model
where there are only two alternatives
with one alternatives representative utility
normalized to zero and
the error term being actually
the difference between the error terms
of the two alternatives.
Now, it should be crystal clear to you that
the discrete choice model framework naturally
and nicely extends
the binary response framework we introduced previously.
There are several identification requirements
of discrete choice models that you need to be aware of.
First, think about this.
If we add a common constant
to the utilities of all alternatives,
will it change each individual's choice decision?
The answer should be no.
Because when individuals choose among alternatives,
they compare the utilities from
different alternatives and the pick
the one generating the highest utility.
If we add a common constant
to the utilities of all alternatives,
it won't change the comparison result,
and therefore won't change individuals choice decisions.
For this reason, in discrete choice models,
only differences in utility matter.
Only the relative values
between different alternative utilities matter.
The absolute values of utilities do not really matter.
We can change the utilities of all alternatives by
the same amount and it
doesn't affect the choice decisions at all.
Therefore, we say we are unable to identify
the absolute value of
each alternative utility from our data.
Because an infinite number of
different absolute values of
utilities could all lead to the same data observation.
In other words, we will not be able to identify
a common intercept in
the utility functions for all alternatives.
Because we can simply set this common intercept to
any value and it won't affect the choice decisions.
For this reason, we can only include
the so called alternative specific intercepts
in the utility functions.
That is, each alternative
has its own intercept coefficient,
which is separate from
other alternatives intercept coefficients.
And we will need to normalize
one alternatives intercept to zero as the baseline.
As a result, what are
the other alternatives intercepts measure?
Actually the differences between
each alternative and the baseline?
Notice that we can actually choose any alternative as
the baseline and it will eventually be all equivalent.
In the same vein, if we have
some x variables whose values
are the same for all alternatives.
For example, those so called demographic variables,
which are tied to each individual,
but are the same for all alternatives,
then we cannot let the coefficients
of these variables be the same for all alternatives.
Because if so, we would essentially have
the same constant value for all alternatives,
which wouldn't be identified when we
estimate these model coefficients
based on the observed data.
Instead, we will have to let
the coefficients for these common variables also be
alternative specific so that each alternative needs
to have its own Beta coefficients
that are separate from others.
In addition, we will need to normalize one
of the alternative specific coefficients to zero.
This identification constraint is very important
to keep in mind when we set up a discrete choice model.
Otherwise, we won't be able to obtain a
definite set of model coefficient values from estimation.
In addition to the absolute values
of utilities being unidentifiable,
the scale of utilities is also unidentifiable.
Think about this. If we multiply
all alternative utilities by a common positive factor,
will this change individual's choice decisions?
Apparently not. Because multiplying
two alternatives utilities by
the same positive factor will
not change that comparison result and
whichever utility was larger
will still be larger after the multiplication.
Therefore, the scale of utilities also doesn't matter.
In order to normalize the scale,
we usually normalize the variance
of the error term to a fixed value.
A good thing about multinomial logit model is that
by assuming the error terms
follow an extreme value distribution,
the variance of the distribution
is already set to a fixed value.
Which is this value as we introduced just now.
In this sense, with multinomial logit models,
the normalization of the scale of utilities
is automatically taken care
of and we don't need to worry about it.
Having understood the identification requirements
of discrete choice models.
Now we can discuss how to
specify the representative utility V_ij.
The most general form of specification of
the representative utility V_ij would be like this.
Again, recall that V_ij measures the observed or
explained part of the utility
of individual i from choosing alternative j.
It can consist of an intercept,
but as we just said,
the intercept has to be alternative specific.
So it's Alpha_ j instead of a common Alpha.
That is separate interceptor values
for different alternatives.
Also, one of the intercepts
needs to be normalized to zero.
As usual, we can include independent variables in V_ij.
However, in the context of discrete choices,
there are different types of independent variables.
Some independent variables are both
individual specific and alternative specific.
Meaning that these variables take
different values for
different individuals and different alternatives.
For example, if we are studying
the choice of transportation modes for daily commute,
then the time of commute needed under
different transportation modes will
be different for different individuals.
These types of independent variables
are denoted with subscripts of
both i and j as x_ij and w_ij here in this equation.
For these variables, we have the flexibility
to either consider common coefficients
for all alternatives as denoted
by Beta without any subscript here,
or allow the coefficients to still be alternative
specific as denoted by Delta_ j here.
>> There is another type of independent variables
that are only individual-specific,
but take the same values across different alternatives.
A leading example of this type of
individual-specific variables are demographic variables.
For example, each individual's income level may have
different impacts on
an individual's choice of transportation mode.
But an individual's income takes
the same value for all different transportation modes.
These types of variables are denoted as
Z_i here with only one subscript i.
Notice, that for this type of variables,
we cannot use a common coefficient, because if so,
then this whole term will take
the same value for all alternatives and
will hence be canceled out in
utility comparison and won't be identified.
Therefore, we will have to let the coefficients to be
alternative-specific as denoted by Gamma_j here,
and need to normalize one of the Gamma js to zero.
Finally, there are
some independent variables that are only
alternative-specific and
take the same value for all individuals.
For example, the prices or
some other characteristics of products.
Notice, that we won't be able
to include these variables into
the model if we
have specified alternative-specific intercepts.
Because such terms would essentially be
a common constant term for
each alternative across all individuals,
which would be subsumed into
the alternative-specific intercept and
won't be able to be identified separately.
As we can see, discrete choice models are more
complex due to its two-dimensional structure.
We need to be very careful when specifying the models,
especially with regard to
the identification of model coefficients.
For our exercises, to keep it simple,
we will only focus on the simplest model specification.
We will only consider x variables that are
both individual and alternative-specific,
and we will only consider common or
the so-called generic coefficients for
these x variables so that
these Beta coefficients will take
the same value across different alternatives.
In addition, we will include
alternative-specific intercepts in the model.
As we said, one alternative-intercept needs
to be normalized to zero.
So if we have j alternatives in total,
there will only be j-1 intercepts to be estimated.
To estimate a discrete choice model,
we will use the same approach
as binary response logic models,
that is the maximum likelihood estimation, MLE.
The likelihood function can be
formulated in a similar fashion.
It is equal to the product of the likelihood or
the probability of observing
each individual's choice decision.
For each individual i,
the probability of observing
he or she choosing alternative j
over all the other alternatives is
simply the choice probability P_ij.
This notation here is just to
make the expression formulated in a systematic way.
Y_ij is an indicator variable
indicating the choice position of each individual i.
For those alternatives that were not chosen by
individual i, y_ij= 0.
For the alternative chosen by individual i, y_ij= 1.
Because P_ij to the power of zero is simply equal to
one and will hence not appear in the product so,
eventually, only the
chosen alternatives choice probability
remains for each individual,
and the overall likelihood function
is just the product of
the choice probabilities of
the alternatives chosen by each individual,
which takes this form, as we already know.
As we introduced previously,
given the data in the model,
the likelihood function is
a function of the unknown coefficients.
The MLE estimation routine search for the set of
model coefficient values that will
maximize the value of the likelihood of function.
One highly favorable property
of multinomial logit models is that
its log-likelihood function is
globally concave in coefficients.
So the numerical search algorithm is guaranteed to
converge and can quickly
fund the optimal coefficient values.
As usual, the next question would be
how to interpret the model estimation results.
In particular, we'd like to
evaluate the marginal or partial effects,
which are the usual measures that measure the effects of
one unit change in
a particular x variable under choice probabilities.
But notice that things are a bit
complex in discrete choice models,
because we are now dealing with multiple alternatives.
The marginal effects depend
on which alternatives x variable is
changing and which alternatives
choice probability is affected.
Let's first discuss the self-marginal effect,
that is the impact of one alternatives,
one particular x variable on
the choice probability of the same alternative.
Recall that we only consider the case where
all x variables are alternative-specific.
Notice, that when calculating
the marginal effects in discrete choice models,
we will pick one x variable of interest and
focus on its impacts on different alternatives.
For example, we can focus on
the commute time as the focal x variable of interest.
Then we can investigate how
an increase in the commute time of
a particular transportation mode will change
the probability of
that same transportation mode being chosen.
So here, x_ij is the commute time for
a particular individual i from
using a particular transportation mode j,
say by taking buses,
and P_ij is the probability of
that individual eventually choosing
buses as the commute mode.
As usual, we can follow
the definition of marginal effects to derive it
mathematically by taking the partial derivative
of P_ij with respect to x_ij.
We'll substitute in the expression
of choice probability P_ij
and perform partial derivative
according to the chain rule of calculus.
I'll skip the details of
the mathematical derivation here and
leave it to those who are
interested to follow the mass on your own.
Take a look at the resulting expression.
The first term Beta is
the coefficient for that particular x variable.
In the most general form of the model,
we may have alternative-specific Beta coefficients.
Then this is the coefficient
specifically for alternative j.
In the basic form of
the model which we're going to focus on,
where we only consider
common generic Beta coefficients for x variables,
then there will be
only one Beta value associated with the focal x variable,
and we can just ignore this subscript j here.
The next two terms are the probability of
the focal alternative j being chosen P_ij*1-P_ij.
There are a few points worth discussing about
this expression of self-marginal effects.
First, the self-marginal effect of
a certain x variable has
the same sign as the Beta coefficient for that variable.
If the Beta coefficient is positive,
it means increasing the value
of the focal x variable for one alternative,
will increase the probability
of that alternative being chosen.
This is very intuitive and easy to understand.
Second, take a look at the term
Pij*1-P_ij and think about this.
When will the marginal effect be the
largest and when will it be the smallest?
Given a Beta value,
the marginal effect gets the largest when P_ij= 1/2,
and the marginal effect gets the
smallest when P_ij is equal to,
either zero or one.
Now, what does this mean?
It's actually easy to interpret and understand.
It means, if an alternative is already
very likely or very unlikely to be chosen,
then further improving some of
its attributes will have
little impact on its choice probability.
Instead, if an alternative has about 50,
50 chance to be chosen,
then improving some of its attributes will be the most
rewarding and will have
the greatest effect on the choice probability.
This actually shares the same spirit as
the result we derived from binary response logic models,
where the choice probability follows
a S shaped curve as
the attributes of the focal alternative improve.
Near both ends,
the choice probabilities change marginally.
However, the choice probability
changes the most significantly
at the steepest slope when
the attributes fall in the middle range.
Similarly, we can derive
the cross marginal effects, that is,
how much one unit change in
one alternatives attribute will change
the choice probability of another alternative.
In our previous example of commuting mode choice,
the cross-marginal effects would be
how much the probability of an
individual choosing to drive
his own car will be affected if
the commute time from
taking buses is increased or decreased.
We can derive the cross-marginal effects
in a similar way by taking
that partial derivative of
P_ij prime with respect to x_ij.
Substituting in the expression of
choice probability and applying
the chain rule of calculus,
we can arrive at this final expression.
The cross-marginal effect equals
minus Beta*P_ij*P_ij prime.
Here, this Beta is
the coefficient in front of the focal x variable.
Again, in our basic form of a model specification,
where we only consider
a common Beta coefficient for all alternatives,
we can ignore this subscript j,
and there is only one Beta coefficient
for all alternatives.
P_ij is the choice probability of the alternative,
whose x variable is changing.
And the P_ij prime is
the choice probability of the alternative,
whose probability of being chosen is being affected.
Take a look at this expression,
which also makes a lot of sense.
First, notice that the sign is the opposite as
compared to that of
the self-marginal effects as we just introduced.
This is easy to understand.
If one alternatives attribute is improved,
it will increase its probability of being chosen.
At the same time, it will decrease the probability
of any other competing alternative being chosen.
This explains the opposite signs
between the self and cross-marginal effects.
Second, if we add up
the self-marginal effect and
the cross-marginal effects of all competing alternatives,
the sum, not surprisingly adds up to zero.
It has to be the case
because each individual eventually,
chooses one and only one alternative from the choice set.
Therefore, if some attribute of one alternative improves,
it will increase the chance of
that alternative being chosen,
yet at the same time,
decrease the chances of
all the other competing alternatives being chosen.
And the changes will cancel out each other and
the net change should eventually be zero,
as we can easily verify from
the mathematical expressions here.
As we can see, the full marginal effects
of a focal x variable actually
form a j by
j matrix with j being the number of alternatives.
If any one of
the j alternatives focal x variable changes in its value,
how will it affect
the choice probability of all j alternatives?
So we are going to have j by j different measures
of marginal effects in a j by j table structure,
as we'll see in the R package output
later in the demonstration.
These are all we want to talk
about for discrete choice models.
We started with the general model framework
for discrete choice problems and derived
a multinomial logit model by assuming
the arritans follow extreme value distributions.
As we show, the binomial logit model from
the binary response framework is actually
a special case of the multinomial logit model.
So discrete choice models are a natural extension of
binary response models to allow
the outcome variable to take multiple categorical values.
We then discuss the identification conditions
of discrete choice models, in that,
neither the absolute values or
the scales of the utilities of alternatives matter.
So we need to normalize the model coefficients properly.
We then discussed how to
estimate multinomial logit models using
the usual MLE method and how to
interpret the model by evaluating the marginal effects.
Due to the multiple alternatives,
we now have both self and cross-marginal effects,
and the full marginal effects of
a focal x variable form j by J matrix.
Hope the content in this video is helpful for you to
understand this advanced yet
very useful modeling framework.
That's all for this video. Thanks for watching.